











                   AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION (ASA)











                      ASA ENERGY STATISTICS COMMITTEE-

              ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION (EIA) MEETING

















                            Alexandria, Virginia

                          Thursday, April 22, 2004










             ASA COMMITTEE ON ENERGY STATISTICS:

                JAY F. BREIDT, Chair
                Colorado State University

                NICOLAS HENGARTNER, Vice Chair
                Los Alamos National Laboratory

                MARK BERNSTEIN
                RAND Corporation

                MARK BURTON
                Marshall University

                MOSHE FEDER
                Research Triangle Institute

                BARBARA FORSYTH
                Westat

                NEHA KHANNA
                Binghampton University

                NAGARAJ K. NEERCHAL
                University of Maryland

                SUSAN M. SEREIKA
                University of Pittsburgh

                RANDY R. SITTER
                Simon Fraser University

             ALSO PRESENT:

                COLLEEN BLESSING
                EIA

                ERIN BOEDECKER
                EIA

                HOWARD BRADSER-FREDERICK
                EIA









             ALSO PRESENT (CONT'D):

                TOM BROENE
                EIA

                PHILLIP BUDZIK
                EIA

                GUY CARUSO
                EIA

                STACEY COLE
                Bureau of the Census

                DAVE COSTELLO
                EIA

                STAN FREEDMAN
                EIA

                FRED FREEM
                EIA

                CAROL FRENCH
                EIA

                JANET GORDON
                EIA

                DOUG HALE
                EIA

                TAMMY HEPPNER
                EIA

                RICK HOGUE
                Bureau of the Census

                PAUL HOLTBERG
                EIA

                SUSAN HOLTE
                EIA








             ALSO PRESENT (CONT'D):

                CRAWFORD HONEYCUTT
                EIA

                ALTHEA JENNINGS
                EIA

                DIANE KEARNEY
                EIA

                NANCY KIRKENDALL
                EIA

                TANCRED LIDDERDALE
                EIA

                EDWIN LU
                EIA

                RUEY-PYNG LU
                EIA

                KEN MARTIN
                PricewaterhouseCoopers

                PRESTON McDOWNEY
                EIA

                HERB MILLER
                EIA

                RENEE MILLER
                EIA

                KARA NORMAN
                EIA

                JOE SEDRANSK
                Case Western Reserve University/EIA

                TOM SPERL
                EIA








             ALSO PRESENT (CONT'D):

                YVONNE TAYLOR
                EIA

                PHILLIP TSENG
                EIA

                KEN VAGTS
                EIA

                SHAUNA WAUGH
                EIA

                BILL WIENIG
                EIA

                LORIE WIJNTJIS
                PricewaterhouseCoopers

                NATHAN WILSON
                EIA




                               *  *  *  *  *
























                              C O N T E N T S

             AGENDA SESSION                             PAGE

             Greetings and Remarks                        15

             Updates Since Fall 2003                      26
             Meeting

             Introduction to Short-Term                   39
             Forecasting

             Background on Short-Term                     46
             Forecasting

             Issues in Short-Term Energy                  60
             Modeling

             Summary of Recommendations                  115

             Natural Gas Prices and                      124
             Industrial Sector Responses

             Summary of Recommendations                  181

             Electricity Transmission                    190

             Electricity 2005                            206

             Transmission Data for                       226
             Public Policy

             Estimating Weekly Other                     246
             Oils Stock

             Summary of Recommendations                  285

             Natural Gas Production                      292
             Monthly Survey


                               *  *  *  *  *









                           P R O C E E D I N G S

                                                      (8:32 a.m.)

                       MR. BREIDT:  Welcome.  This

              meeting is being held under the provision

              of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.

              This is an American Statistical Association

              (ASA) committee, not an EIA committee,

              which periodically provides advice to EIA.

              The meeting is open to the public and

              public comments are welcome.  Time will be

              set aside for comments at the end of each

              morning and the afternoon session.  Written

              comments are welcome and may be sent to

              either ASA or EIA.

                       All attendees, including guests

              and EIA employees, should sign the register

              in the hall and include their e-mail

              addresses.  Rest rooms are at the end of

              the hall toward the back of this room.  A

              fountain is in the same corridor on the

              way.  Telephones in this room share a

              single number.  That number is (202)








              586-3071.

                       Kathleen Wert and Tara Stull with

              the ASA Meetings Department are here and

              available for committee members for

              questions on expense reimbursements.  In

              commenting each participant is asked to

              speak toward a microphone.  The transcriber

              will appreciate that and we have

              microphones both along the desktop and we

              have the standing microphones here.  You

              have to speak clearly and into a

              microphone.  These microphones are

              reasonable sensitive, so you may not need

              to lean into them.

                       Speakers can use this podium

              microphone.  There's also a lapel

              microphone.  A pointer is available around

              here somewhere.  I'd like to start out now

              by having us introduce ourselves and I'll

              start out.  My name is Jay Breidt.  I'm a

              professor in the Department of Statistics

              at Colorado State University and chair of








              this committee.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  I'm Nagaraj

              Neerchal, Professor of Statistics at UMBC,

              University of Maryland, Baltimore County.

                       MS. FORSYTH:  I'm Barbara Forsyth.

              I'm a survey methodologist at Westat.

                       DR. FEDER:  I'm Moshe Feder, a

              statistician from the Research Triangle

              Institute.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  My name is Nick

              Hengartner.  I'm with LANL and I'm the Vice

              Chair of the committee.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I'm Neha Khanna.  I'm

              an assistant professor of Economics and

              Environmental Studies at Binghamton

              University.

                       DR. BURTON:  I'm Mark Burton.  I'm

              an associate professor of Economics from

              Marshall University.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I'm Mark

              Bernstein.  I'm from RAND Corporation.

                       MR. CARUSO:  Guy Caruso, Energy








              Information Administration.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Nancy Kirkendall,

              Energy Information Administration.

                       MR. BREIDT:  If we could go back

              into the audience, and please use the

              microphones.

                       MR. TSENG:  My name is Phillip

              Tseng.  I'm with the EIA.

                       MR. HALE:  I'm Doug Hale.  I'm

              with EIA.

                       MS. BLESSING:  Colleen Blessing,

              EIA.

                       MS. HOLTE:  Susan Holte, EIA.

                       MS. WIJNTJIS:  Lorie Wijntjis,

              Price Waterhouse Coopers.

                       MR. MARTIN:  Ken Martin, Price

              Waterhouse coopers.

                       MR. VAGTS:  Ken Vagts, EIA.

                       MS. FRENCH:  Carol French, EIA.

                       MS. MILLER:  Renee Miller, EIA.

                       MS. HEPPNER:  Tammy Heppner, EIA.

                       MR. WILSON:  Nathan Wilson, EIA.








                       MS. KEARNEY:  Diane Kearney, EIA.

                       MR. BROEM:  Tom Broem, EIA.

                       MS. GORDON:  Janet Gordon, EIA.

                       MR. FREEDMAN:  Stan Freedman, EIA.

                       MR. SEDRANSK:  Joe Sedransk, SWRU

              and EIA.

                       MR. HONEYCUTT:  Crawford

              Honeycutt, EIA.

                       MS. TAYLOR:  Yvonne Taylor, EIA.

                       MS. BOEDECKER:  Erin Boedecker,

              EIA.

                       MS. JENNINGS:  Alethea Jennings,

              EIA.

                       MR. PYNG LU:  Ruey-Pyng Lu, EIA.

                       MR. LU:  Edwain Lu, EIA.

                       MR. MILLER:  Herb Miller, EIA.

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Dave Costello, EIA.

                       MR. WIENIG:  Bill Wienig, EIA.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Thank you.  For those

              of you who haven't been here before that

              mobile microphone is a huge technological

              advance over the old system so thanks to








              EIA for that.  For your information Nancy

              J. Kirkendall is the designated federal

              officer for the advisory committee.  In

              this capacity Dr. Kirkendall may chair but

              must attend each meeting and she is

              authorized to adjourn the meeting if she

              determines this to be in the public

              interest.  She must approve all meetings of

              the advisory committee and every agenda.

              Also, she may designate a substitute in her

              absence.

                       We have an interesting agenda

              today and tomorrow.  We have some plenary

              sessions and we have a number of breakout

              sessions, eight of them.  This is probably

              a record.  We'll be fairly busy.  We'll try

              to keep on time and, of course, we're

              already not on time but we'll try to catch

              up.

                       So the first section of the

              meeting will begin with a briefing by Guy

              Caruso, EIA's administrator.  Then Nancy








              Kirkendall, the Director of the Statistics

              and Methods Group, will comment on EIA work

              since the Fall 2003 meeting.  After Nancy's

              comments we'll begin the first morning's

              breakout sessions.  Those will be on EIA's

              work in short-term forecasting as well as

              measuring the quality of EIA analysis, part

              of EIA's strategic plan goals for 2004 to

              2008.

                       Lunch for the committee and

              invited guests will be on the first floor

              at 12:30.  It will be in Room 1E226 in the

              same corridor as we are in now.  That's the

              usual place.  This evening we have a

              reservation for dinner at the Little Viet

              Garden in Clarendon in Arlington, Virginia.

              So we need a show of hands but there's a

              note here that it's a short Metro line on

              the Orange Line and we'll probably need to

              stick together.  The reservations are at

              6:15 if anyone's interested.  So could I

              see a show of hands for committee members








              for dinner tonight?  Bill, did you get

              that?

                       Tomorrow morning, breakfast for

              the committee and the EIA participants and

              management will be here again beginning at

              about 8:00 so we can meet in the hotel

              lobby around 7:45 if you care to do that.

              We will resume tomorrow at 8:30 here in

              this room.

                       A couple of other announcements.

              We have two new members on the committee.

              One is here already.  This is Barb Forsyth.

              And one had a late class last night in

              Pittsburgh.  That's Susan Sereika, who will

              be joining us later.

                       Bill Moss and Jae Edmonds will not

              be attending today.  Finally, the usual

              meeting mechanic is that if the panelists

              have a comment you turn your name tag

              vertically to be recognized.

                       Now its my pleasure to recognize

              Guy Caruso, administrator of EIA.








                       MR. CARUSO:  Thanks, Jay, and

              welcome, everyone, especially Barbara to

              your first meeting.  We appreciate your

              joining the committee.

                       As usual it's been a busy six

              months since we last met in October.  Since

              then we've done the usual core products

              that you are all familiar with.  The annual

              energy outlook came out right after our

              meeting last time.  Since then we have had,

              of course, the international energy outlook

              just last week.

                       But I think the thing that's been

              shall I say driving a lot of the activities

              of the EIA since October have been energy

              markets particularly for natural gas and

              gasoline.  Some of the topics on todays

              agenda, in fact several of the topics, will

              address what we are doing in those areas

              that we think this committee can be helpful

              in.  I'll talk a little bit more in detail

              on gasoline in the short term, which, of








              course, is instrumental in our short-term

              outlook, and just two weeks ago we did our

              summer driving season outlook conference

              using the short-term energy outlook model

              which Dave Costello is going to talk about

              a little later.

                       Natural gas prices continue to be

              very firm with the prospects of them

              staying there which has important

              implications for our work on both the

              supply and the demand side.  Both of those

              areas will be discussed today.

                       Ill talk a little bit about our

              budget which we submitted in February.  We

              have had all of our hearings and we

              certainly hope that the Congress will vote

              on that before they adjourn.  I'll mention

              that as we talk about the budget in

              particular, where we think that's headed.

                       And the trend that I mentioned

              probably in all of the meetings that we

              have been in together that I have had the








              privilege of addressing the committee on is

              that the continued trend of being asked to

              do more policy analysis, what-if analysis,

              using both the NEMS and the short-term

              model, and that's continued and accelerated

              probably in the last six to eight months,

              mainly because of the energy bill that's

              still being debated in Congress.

                       The high gasoline prices, of

              course, are an analytical issue but in

              particular at this time a political issue.

              With the Presidential election coming up

              its taken on even a greater significance

              and so EIA, the numbers we produce each

              week, whether they be prices or inventory

              numbers, and our analysis each month, I

              think more attention is being paid to that

              than ever.

                       In particular the media interest

              in what EIA does has also intensified and

              so all the more reason why, I think, we

              want to refine the work we do in the








              short-term energy outlook and in the

              collection of the gasoline data which, as

              some of you know, we have increased the

              detail in which we collect the weekly

              gasoline data to include more blending

              components, which have become very

              important given the introduction of ethanol

              in substituting for MTBE.

                       We have redesigned our sample in

              collecting that gasoline data and the new

              forms were just reported on April 14.  So

              that was the first weekend.  We certainly

              had the usual running in problems and I'm

              not sure we'll have a chance to talk about

              that in more detail later.

                       This next slide just shows that

              kind of run-up in not only gasoline but

              crude oil prices that has occurred over the

              last several years and began to intensify

              the interest in what we do.

                       The next one shows something that

              there has been a lot of interest in, not








              only among our customers but among the

              regulatory agencies such as FERC and CFTC

              and that is how EIA data moves markets and

              there have even been several investigations

              called for by Congress as to whether

              there's any possibility of manipulation of

              the market that certainly, I think, once

              again shows how important the data we

              collect and the way we produce and analyze

              and disseminate it are important not only

              to the customers but to efficient markets.

                       Natural gas prices have been

              rising steadily and now are moving hand and

              glove with crude oil prices.  We have been

              trying to improve and I know Beth Campbell

              in one of the first meetings I was at in

              this committee, talked about the way we

              collect production data.

                       We are now almost ready to release

              a Federal Register notice on the

              possibility of a new production survey for

              natural gas and we are going to discuss








              that, I know, in this agenda as well so we

              really seek your advice in that area.

                       We hope to initiate a new natural

              gas production survey in the issues

              regarding frames and other statistical

              measures with respect to that that would be

              valuable to get your input on that.

                       The other analytical issue which

              has emerged from the natural gas price run-

              up is what it has been and what will be the

              impact on in particular industrial demand

              for natural gas.  This is another area

              where we believe more analytical work needs

              to be done improving our models, whether

              they be the short-term or the long-term,

              and certainly that's an area where again we

              think the committee could be of assistance

              to us.

                       As I mentioned, we submitted the

              budget and have had budget hearings for FY

              05.  It's a request for $85 million, which

              is almost $4 million more than FY 04.  It's








              a bit misleading in that last year in the

              current FY 04 budget although we have an

              $81 million budget this year we are

              actually operating on $84 million of

              expenditures because we are taking $3

              million from de-obligated and uncosted

              funds of a previous year.  So although this

              looks great, a 5- percent increase, its

              really a lot less than that and Howard and

              I are working very hard to try to get more

              resources, which we all know EIA spends

              very judiciously.

                       So we hope that that would happen.

              The latest work from people who follow the

              Hill very closely is that there's a high

              likelihood that perhaps Defense and maybe

              one other major appropriation bill will

              actually pass this session and that all of

              the other budgetary items will go into an

              omnibus bill which is likely to go into a

              continuing resolution because of the

              elections coming up and the difficulty of








              trying to pass all of those budgets before

              Congress adjourns.

                       So well keep you posted on that.

              Probably by the next meeting we'll know a

              lot more.  With the increase in the money,

              as I mentioned, the production survey is

              one of the major new things we'll be doing

              in FY 05 if all goes well and we can get

              the approval from OMB and are ready to move

              on that as early as 1 January 05 if

              possible.  That's our goal to at least

              start.

                       We clearly need through

              Congressional mandate to update the

              voluntary reporting on greenhouse gas

              survey and database, the so-called 1605(b),

              which I know Jae Edmonds has been so close

              to.

                       We are working on a number of

              things within the NEMS modeling, the

              long-term modeling system, one of which is

              the transportation sector.  One that's not








              listed here but I know we'll be working on

              is this issue of natural gas and its use in

              the industrial and manufacturing sectors.

              What does $5 gas mean for that kind of

              demand as well as on the oil side the

              imposition of new fuel standards?  Low

              sulfur gasoline and deisel fuel are

              important, and the regionalization of our

              short-term energy model, which will be an

              important topic on your agenda today.

                       This next slides shows just a

              sample of the reports we have been asked to

              do by Congress.  They're almost all related

              to the Energy Bill or the Omnibus or the

              comprehensive energy bill that was

              introduced two years ago and reintroduced

              last year.

                       There have been a number of

              negotiations going on.  Its uncertain

              whether there will be an energy bill but

              nonetheless EIA has been asked to analyze

              not only the whole comprehensive bill by








              Senators Sununu and Senator Dorgan in two

              separate versions of the bill but we have

              been asked to do specific analysis with

              respect to things like the Alaska Natural

              Wildlife Refuge, issues with respect to

              LNG, and global oil markets.

                       So EIA I think in the last six

              months has been quoted and relied on

              extensively in Congress and within the

              administration and some of the work that

              this committee has assisted with has been

              extremely valuable in our analytical

              responses to Congress and the

              administration as well as the regular

              products that we produce.

                       So finally this just sums up some

              of the things that we will be asking your

              advice and counsel on with respect to these

              new products that we are working on,

              improvement of existing systems in terms of

              surveys and frames and also the cognitive

              methods in establishment surveys.  I'm sure








              Nancy will go into more detail on some of

              these things.

                       And the other topic that no matter

              where I go, and I'm around speaking to a

              number of different meetings that the EIA

              website continues to be extremely heavily

              used and very popular and nowhere around

              the world or certainly within this country

              can you go without someone coming up and

              saying oh, I love your website.

              Occasionally they will have a little

              suggestion but basically it's our main

              vehicle for getting the information and

              analysis we do across to the public as well

              as to our other customers.

                       So, once again, what you are doing

              in helping us to achieve our goals of

              better quality and more timely and accurate

              data and analysis is invaluable and I thank

              you all once again for your time.  I

              appreciate your all being here and look

              forward to working with you over the next








              couple of days.

                       Thank you, Jay.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Next Nancy Kirkendall

              will update the committee on progress since

              the Fall 2003 Meeting.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, I'd like to

              welcome the committee before we get the

              slides started.  The purpose of my talk is

              what weve done regarding some of the advice

              you gave us last time and how it ties in to

              some of the things were going to ask you

              about this time so it's a transition kind

              of talk.

                       While Preston is looking for it

              one of the major things that EIA did, I

              think it was March we agreed to the

              strategic plan.  We talked about the

              strategic plan with you last time,

              particularly the action items under goal

              one.  Now the strategic plan has been

              finalized and agreed to by all EIA senior

              staff so we are now serious about doing all








              the things we said we were going to do.

                       We will talk about the status of

              the strategic plan because there are lots

              of action items in the strategic plan that

              have a lot to do with statistics, how do we

              measure things and how do we report them,

              so that will be a topic of a number of

              break-out sessions today as it was at the

              last meeting.

                       Guy mentioned that we have a

              number of initiatives.  We've talked to you

              before about natural gas and we have a few

              of them on the agenda again this time.

              I'll give you an update on the Confidential

              Information Protection and Statistical

              Efficiency Act, CIPSEA, we call it, how EIA

              is implementing that, so this is just a

              brief progress report on that activity.

                       We have some sessions on

              electricity, particularly on electricity

              transmission, and I'm not really going to

              say a whole lot about the STEO.  That's aa








              new initiative that well be talking to you

              about.  So I'm really just going to use

              that as an introduction to Howard

              Gruenspecht, who will tell you more about

              that.

                       So these are the three goals from

              our strategic plan.  Not all of you,

              Barbara is new, but many of you have seen

              them before.  The first one has most

              statistical content because we are

              interested in measuring relevance,

              reliability, consistency, timeliness,

              accuracy, all the wonderful things you'd

              like to have be attributes of your data, so

              that's the area that we are going to

              concentrate on but you can see what the

              others are, too.

                       Guy touched on this.  We would

              like our resource base to be sufficient.

              The third one is we'd like to operate in an

              effective and an efficient way providing

              good leadership.








                       So under relevance and reliability

              a number of these are measures that we have

              been collecting for a long time so these

              will just continue.  The number of

              information products requested, these are

              briefings and things that are requested by

              high level officials, either senior people

              in the department or Congress.  It includes

              the service reports that Guy talked about.

              Tom Broem manages that and is very careful

              to make it a nice, consistent series.  We

              also have one that talks about the percent

              of frames that are deemed sufficient.

                       We talked to you about this last

              time.  We've done more work.  There's a

              break-out session, I think, later today on

              our work on frames.  We have decided that

              we would like to have percent of all EI

              frames that we think are sufficient so we

              are taking a broad look at all EIA frames.

              Weve got about 70 surveys and we are

              looking at a variety of methods for








              deciding whether they are sufficient.  They

              are going to tell you what we have done and

              what we have looked at and ask your advice

              on how do we come up with measures of

              whether a frame is sufficient.  There are a

              lot of different ways of going about it and

              we would like the least cost ways of

              getting the most appropriate measure.

                       Outside expert evaluations, we

              talked to you about this last time and you

              totally rejected what our proposal was.  So

              we went back to square one and redesigned

              our survey frame.

                       This time we have interviewed

              people who have been attending our NEMS

              conference.  These are pre-registrants.  We

              have data to show you and we'll ask your

              advice on interpretation of results and how

              to move forward in the future.  One of the

              challenges is trying to find a list of

              experts who can give you good evaluations

              of your analytical products.








                       On quality the measure is the

              number of surveys meeting quality targets

              and we've talked to you about this a number

              of times.  Tom Broem is going to talk about

              this.  I think that's on Friday.

                       Customer satisfied and very

              satisfied, this year we are going to be

              using the American Customer Satisfaction

              Index again.  We did that three years ago.

              Basically our approach is we do something

              every year but there's no reason to do the

              American Customer Satisfaction every year.

              We have to pay to do that, for one thing.

              Colleen Blessing is our customer

              satisfaction guru and they frequently do

              web-based surveys in the intermediate

              times.

                       Timeliness, senior staff has

              pretty much agreed to release targets for

              all of our products.  I'm not sure we have

              actually implemented it yet but there's

              been an agreement that this is what we will








              do.  I'm not sure that we've actually let

              people know what our targets are.

                       Then the customer and stakeholder

              involvement is just a list of events.  It

              includes things like this meeting, talking

              to the American Statistical Associations

              Energy Committee, our NEMS conference, some

              of our other outreach conferences, and

              other things.  We thought that a list with

              discussion among senior staff was probably

              more useful than just counting things.

                       So the challenges you are going to

              be hearing about I've actually already

              touched on most of these.  We have a

              breakout session to talk about frames.  We

              have another breakout session to talk about

              our interviews with outside experts and

              users of our annual energy outlook and our

              international energy outlook.  We also have

              another session talking about surveys

              meeting performance targets.

                       So just an update on some of the








              other things we talked about last time, you

              have heard a lot about how we estimate

              natural gas production in Texas.  This one

              is a nice one because there's actually data

              available from the state.

                       One of the things we talked about

              was an evaluation of methods and you gave

              us some advice.  I think that what we'll do

              is to update that and bring it back to you

              because I think we'd like to use the

              approach more consistently in the work that

              we do in SMG to evaluate various methods of

              doing things.  So it's nice to have a

              statement of how we think we should go

              about an evaluation.

                       In Texas we talked last time and

              observed that there was a bias using the

              method that Randy Sitter's student,

              Crystal, came up with and that's because of

              changes in reporting in the State of Texas.

              So we haven't done any work on that yet

              although the Dallas field office has done








              some work and they would like to talk to

              you about that in the fall.

                       They talked about your

              recommendations in the Gulf.  Of course,

              Dallas is still using the methods they were

              talking about.  They are trying to do more

              company-level time series analysis.  I'm

              not sure exactly where they are on that.

              That's a difficult problem because the data

              aren't really rich.  There's only so much

              you can do with flaky data.

                       Guy talked about the new natural

              gas production survey.  Inder Kundra is

              going to talk about that in a session

              tomorrow.  We are going to be doing a

              sample from the frame for one of our other

              surveys, the EIA 23, which is an annual

              survey that goes to producers of oil and

              natural gas.

                       The intention of the survey is a

              little different but it ought to be a

              pretty good frame so he's going to talk








              about sample selection and some of the

              difficulties and changes over time in the

              frame and whatever else comes up.

                       We talked to you about we had a

              survey that collects commercial and

              residential prices of natural gas but only

              in five states.  We talked about that with

              you last time.  We're going to implement it

              in seven additional states at some time.

              We hope to start in January 2005.  It

              depends on resources and other things but

              that's where the plans are.  It will be

              seven additional states and the District of

              Columbia.

                       Industrial prices, haven't done a

              whole lot of work on that yet.  We're still

              considering going to the Census Bureau.

              Now we are talking to them about the

              possibility of an annual survey to get

              information about natural gas prices in the

              industrial sector.  It would be volumes and

              prices in the industrial sector.  That








              sounds like it might be promising.

                       So for CIPSEA, the Confidential

              Information Protection and Statistical

              Efficiency Act, this act gives EIA for the

              first time the ability to actually protect

              data reported to us by filing respondents.

              In the past we were not able to protect it

              completely because we had to share it on

              request with other government agencies if

              they asked for it for official use, not

              statistical use but official use.

                       So now we have 11 information

              collections that are under CIPSEA.  We have

              modified all of our wording so that it

              clearly defines what kind of information

              and confidentiality protection we can give.

                       We are developing a training

              program for staff because CIPSEA also

              carries with it penalties for release.

              People can go to jail for releasing

              information that's collected under CIPSEA

              so people need to take it seriously and we








              need to train everybody.

                       And Jay Castlebury is

              participating in an inter-agency committee

              led by OMB that is going to put out

              guidance for all agencies on this.  The

              good thing about that is that way we know

              it's going to be coming out and our views

              are reflected in the guidelines, too.

                       Under electricity actually the

              committee was interesting.  You suggested

              that the data needs depend on industry

              structure and, of course, its still

              changing.  So you are going to have an

              update today.  Since the last meeting we

              have done focus groups.  We are going to

              give you a report on the focus groups.

                       Since the last meeting they have

              redesigned our electricity forums.  They

              have gone out with their Federal Register,

              so plans on implementing electricity 2005

              are well under way.  Bob Schnapp will talk

              to you about that.








                       Doug talked to you about his

              transmission paper.  That has been

              finalized.  He's not going to talk to you

              about it but we do have time for you to ask

              him questions about it and he is here in

              the audience so I encourage you to talk to

              him if you have any comments about his

              paper.

                       We talked to you about data edits

              for the 9:20 and we have not done very much

              with that at this point.  We ran out of

              time so that's an item that you might

              actually hear about in another session.

                       So the last item, the short-term

              energy outlook, this is a new effort that

              we are starting up.  I think that the

              committee will find it interesting.  This

              is the first time you will have heard about

              our STEO.  Maybe it was discussed years and

              years ago but not in recent history anyway.

                       So with that I'll introduce Howard

              Gruenspecht since he is actually going to








              introduce the STEO modeling effort.

                       MR. GRUENSPECHT:  Good morning,

              welcome.  Thanks for coming to help us out.

              Obviously, as you can see from Nancy's

              presentation, it's quite helpful, the

              information exchange we have with you.  It

              does affect what we do.  I wanted to talk

              to you very briefly about the work on doing

              some regionalization on the short-term

              forecasting model.

                       The short-term model has been

              something of great interest to me, really,

              from the moment I arrived at EIA about a

              year ago.  From the start it was apparent

              to me that together with our weekly reports

              on gasoline prices the short-term outlook

              gets by far the most attention in the

              mainstream press, not the expert trade

              press that deals with energy matters but

              the mainstream press relative to other EIA

              products.

                       It's pretty understandable.








              People want to read about the outlook for

              gasoline prices this coming summer or what

              their heating costs are going to be next

              winter and that's what the short-term

              forecasting model and the short-term energy

              outlook put out each month look at.  So it

              does get a lot of attention and its

              important to do the best possible job in

              these areas of great importance to EIA.

                       The STIFS model and the STEO

              publication derived from it each month

              really benefits, I think, from being run by

              a very strong team within EIA.  You will be

              hearing from Dave Costello, who, I think,

              leads that work under the direction of Mark

              Roedecker.  They really are very dedicated,

              very strong intellectually, very open to

              suggestions and new thinking, and, again,

              given the importance that the public places

              and the prominence that the STEO results

              receive, its really important.

                       Some changes have been made








              already.  I don't know if you look at the

              STEO but we have gone to a shorter STEO

              text.  We have gone to a more careful

              approach explaining confidence intervals.

              I think there is some use of more

              sophisticated approaches in some aspects of

              estimating the model and the confidence

              intervals which are important use of some

              stochastic estimation.

                       But the focus of what you are

              going to hear about today is on

              regionalization.  I call it limited

              regionalization because really we are not

              going to do a full regionalization of the

              model.  I think that the project to put

              some more regional content into the model

              is really a critical element to making the

              short-term energy outlook more useful and

              more relevant.

                       The project aims to provide

              greater depth, consistency, relevance and

              credibility to the monthly short-term








              forecast by allowing for unique regional

              factors that affect energy demand supplies

              and prices in important ways that tend to

              get obscured if you are trying to estimate

              a national model.

                       A good example would be, lets say,

              gasoline in California.  That's a

              regionally very isolated market for

              gasoline.  You can have very different

              things going on in that market and going on

              in the rest of the country.

                       Heating oil effectively used

              significantly in New England and the

              northeast, not used much any place else.

              People don't care about it much any place

              else.  You really want to know what's going

              on in heating oil markets in those areas,

              not on a national average basis.

                       So there's clearly a value in

              developing the information.  So the depth

              we'll get we'll have a better

              deconstruction of broad US energy








              developments.  The relevance will be

              tailored better to regional audiences and

              their areas of interest.

                       The consistency will be better

              because we'll eliminate some of the biases

              that creep in when you use highly

              aggregated data to develop these national

              average forecasts when you really have

              different things going on in different

              areas.  And the credibility is that

              important regional energy market

              developments are not obscured or ignored.

              So there's a lot to be gained from this.

                       There's also a need to balance

              what we are doing here, I think, because,

              remember, this model unlike some of the

              other things we do here on an annual basis

              is the crank we've got to turn every month.

              Already it can get very demanding to

              implement this model and estimate it on a

              monthly cycle.  So we want to have this

              additional limited amount of regional








              detail but we don't want to develop a tool

              that in the end if you had a monthly cycle

              and it took you more than a month to run

              your model and be comfortable with it you'd

              have a big problem.

                       So we have to worry about yes, we

              want regionalization to some degree but we

              also have to made sure that we're coming up

              with a workable tool.  So you will hear

              about this from David and also from Phil

              Tseng.  It's a pretty high priority for us.

              It's something that the Secretary, I think,

              asked us to do last June along with the

              natural gas production survey that Guy

              already talked about and some other things.

                       We think there's a lot of

              potential there.  It's still at a stage

              where input would be helpful.  It's not

              cast in stone.  We're working on it.  The

              goal, I think, is to have the model ready

              to go at the beginning of the next calendar

              year.  And that's really where we are.  You








              will hear more about it from Dave and Phil,

              so I'll just get out of the way and let you

              hear from them.  Thank you.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Questions?

                       MR. BREIDT:  Thank you.  Before

              David starts I wonder for instance we could

              have the people who just arrived introduce

              themselves.

                       MR. COLE:  My name is Stacey Cole.

              I'm from the Bureau of the Census.  I work

              on the NEC survey.

                       MR. HOGUE:  Rick Hogue, also from

              the Census Bureau, NEC survey.

                       MS. WAUGH:  Shauna Waugh,

              Statistics and Methods Group, EIA.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Im Howard

              Bradsher-Frederick.  I'm with the

              statistics and methods group of EIA.

                       MR. HOLTBERG:  Im Paul Holtberg.

              I'm the Director of the Demand and

              Integration Division in EIA.

                       MR. SPERL:  Tom Sperl,








              International Policy.

                       MR. FREEM:  Im Fred Freem, Coal,

              EIA.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Thank you.  Now I'd

              like to turn it over the David Costello to

              talk about background on EIA short term

              forecasting.

                       MR. COSTELLO:  That's me, Dave

              Costello.  Basically my life's work here

              has to do with turning this outlook out

              every month and all the things that go

              along with that.

                       Today I just want to basically

              give you a little background on what it is

              in the first place, what we do.  I'm going

              to give a little example of some analysis

              that we do with the model and I'm going to

              talk about essentially the plan for

              regionalizing it a little bit and some

              reasons why we're going to do it, what we

              hope to get out of it, and when we hope to

              do it.








                       The first slide here just gives an

              indication of what the coverage is.  It's a

              national model although we do look at world

              oil markets because obviously we have to

              have some background for determining our

              oil prices.

                       It's a monthly model.  The

              frequency is monthly.  We get a lot of our

              own data from EIA but also from the other

              agencies and other sources outside of EIA.

              Generally speaking, the forecast goes from

              12 to 24 months ahead.

                       Every January we move the forecast

              up one more year just as a convention and,

              as Howard said, we update this every month

              and we post the information on the web,

              including a simulating version of the model

              which is in Windows that you can download.

                       But a lot of offices work on this

              model.  It's not just this forecasting

              project.  It's not just my team but also

              teams in the CNEAF and OIAF, just to throw








              out a couple of names that you may not know

              what the heck that means, but it's a

              multiple office job and there's a lot of

              people involved.

                       Just a little more on the general

              structure of the thing, there are about 900

              endogenous variables in there currently

              although there are a little less than 200

              actual stochastic estimating equations so,

              of course, we have a lot of identities,

              some of which are very interesting, some of

              which aren't.

                       The model is currently estimated

              and simulated in EVIEWS 4.1, which is just

              a PC-based econometric package, but we find

              it very handy, not to do a plug but its an

              improvement on what we had before.

                       So far as who looks at this, not

              to go into too much detail but so far in

              April I think we have been averaging about

              1300 hits a day on the web at the main STEO

              page and we have a list serve of about








              4,000 customers that get the notification

              of the report every month.

                       Just to give you an idea of how we

              put this together, we read a lot of the

              maintained monthly data from EIA along with

              some weather data.  We get weather

              forecasts from NOAA, by the way, and, of

              course, the history is also from NOAA.  EIA

              internally runs a macro model, which is a

              quarterly modeled US economy from Global

              Insight, and they provide us with monthly

              inputs for our model.

                       We pull that all together and

              create a historical database which is

              always available.  That database goes into

              EVIEWS and the model is estimated and

              saved.  When we are ready to do a forecast

              we just pull in the exogenous forecasts,

              weather.

                       Some of the energy variables are

              exogenous to this model such as nuclear

              power, for example.  We get that from CNEAF








              and hydroelectric also  the model and

              put it out to files and make reports.  Of

              course, this happens numerous times in the

              course of a month because you get data

              updates and also you have to look at the

              results and made sure they make some sense

              and hopefully they do.  Usually at the last

              minute we determine that they finally do

              make sense.  Anyway, I thought I would just

              do a little example of some analysis that

              is easy to do and I thought it was a little

              interesting.

                       It starts with natural gas but I'm

              really going to talk about electricity

              because when Phil Tseng gets up he's going

              to get into a little bit more detail about

              what we are going to do in that sector for

              the regionalization.

                       This is just a schematic.  I'm not

              going to give too much detail on how we put

              together natural gas demands and the

              supply.  Our main focus here is to get an








              equilibrium spot price for natural gas.

              Its a fairly well integrated market in the

              US and we are looking at producing area

              spot price average as the prime thing.

              This helps determine end use prices for the

              rest of the model but basically having the

              model search for the price that

              equilibrates demand and supplies, how this

              particular model works.

                       Electricity demands, we put that

              together again.  We estimate the model by

              sector nationally.  This is the electricity

              demand side.  And we come up with a total

              demand for electricity which, if you go to

              the next slide, basically helps us

              determine how much generation we are going

              to need.  We have a little bit of imports

              but basically it determines the amount of

              electric load that we have.

                       As I said before, we are taking

              nuclear and hydroelectric power as

              exogenous from other EIA models.  Our main








              problem is, of course, there are some

              renewables and we make some estimates of

              those but our main problem is basically to

              figure out what the possible fuel

              components are of the electric power

              generation.

                       We basically do that by a set of

              equations that use some cross-price

              elasticities and some other factors.  But

              anyway, not to get to much into the

              schematic, if we go to the next page,

              here's the scenario.  The reason I did this

              one is that it's timely.  Today EIA

              projects that natural gas supply will grow

              domestically about a percent a year through

              the next two years.  We have a very high

              drilling rate and this is the result that

              we get.

                       However, there are a lot of

              analysts that feel that that's too

              optimistic.  So we did a scenario where in

              fact the production decline is greater than








              what we are getting out of this model

              itself.

                       In that case we wind up with about

              two BCF a day less by the end of the

              horizon than we have in our current base

              case.  The right panel is the impact that

              that has on the price.  Instead of 5.50 gas

              we are talking about 6.50 gas on average

              over the next year or two.

                       So what does that so?  Well, it

              feeds, of course, importantly, into the

              electricity model.  Here's the impact on

              natural gas demand by sector.  Its fairly

              significant.  Eventually we lose about 1.6

              BCF a day in total demand by sector in

              terms of the total.

                       We also have a little bit less

              electricity demand.  Electricity costs do

              go up and it does affect output a little

              bit but not very much.  Its relatively

              small.

                       The mix of generation does change.








              The higher natural gas prices naturally

              reduce natural gas demand.  It pulls down a

              little but mainly that's because of the

              output effect on electricity demand.  The

              really only other options are for basically

              oil-based generation to increase and that's

              the result.

                       Now, it seems to make sense but if

              you were to simulate this model over a

              period of time how would it do?  So I

              figured we'd better do that.  This is based

              on a simulation from January '99 through

              the latest historical period.  This is the

              scatter on the predicted versus actual

              coal-based generation number from STIFS.

                       The mean absolute percent error is

              a little under 2 percent, which sounds

              pretty good but actually it's a lot of

              electricity because coal is very big.  By

              the way, this simulation assumes I know

              what the fuel costs are which is okay for

              this piece of analysis but obviously in the








              forecast we don't really know.

                       The mean absolute percent error

              for natural gas is almost 8 percent and for

              oil its about 14 percent.  Well, all it's

              not too bad and bias that seems to show up

              from this sort of exercise is not

              tremendous, pretty much negligible.

                       But the thing of it is that there

              are lots of things that would have had to

              go into determining this.  A lot of

              assumptions were basically made about how

              we figured out how much oil-based

              generation was going to replace natural

              gas.  On a national level it works out okay

              except that it leaves open a lot of

              questions.  Where did it exactly happen?

              Well, we know it's not going to happen

              everywhere because there's not a lot of oil

              generation everywhere.

                       And does this approach tend to

              overstate or understate?  It doesn't seem

              to do too much of either one way or the








              other but on the other hand we probably

              could do better on the percent error for

              any given month.  In order to do that we

              really do have to get down to a little bit

              more detail, a lot more detail, really, on

              the regional composition of generation and

              in order to do that we have to know more

              about how demand patterns vary by region.

              So that's what we are going to do.

                       Well, I think Howard talked about

              these factors.  It may make our national

              level forecast for some variables to add

              this regional detail, which, by the way, I

              think Phil will talk about this a little

              more.  Basically we are talking about

              looking at the demand for electricity and

              for natural gas by census reading or census

              division.  We are looking at determining

              electricity supply by NERC region or pretty

              much the same supply regions that NEMS

              currently has.

                       Its a little bit of a variant on








              some of the standard NERC regions.  So it

              may actually make the national level

              forecast more accurate but I don't think we

              can tell that for sure until we get into it

              but that certainly is the hope.

                       Why now?  Actually, regionalizing

              the short-term model has been an idea

              that's been around a long time.  Its been

              in our stretch plan for the long term, if

              you will, for some years.  But now we have

              additional resources that are being

              allocated to it and a lot of interest in

              EIA management to do it so we are fortunate

              to have that.

                       As I said, a lot of the demand

              detail will be by census region or census

              division.  We are going to look at market

              area price determinations for natural gas.

              We're not going to do necessarily a whole

              lot of demand and supply by region for

              natural gas.  Our main focus is going to be

              on Henry Hub prices, looking at the








              integrated national demand-supply balance

              for gas.

                       Then we are going to spend a lot

              of time focusing on how a benchmark price

              like Henry Hub could be translated into

              regional spot prices based on the behavior

              of the basis differentials and factors that

              affect those.  So we're picking out some

              strategic spot prices for natural gas to do

              and those will generate our end use prices

              by region where we need them and hopefully

              provide key information about the

              particulars of those markets, whether it be

              factors that relate to pipeline capacity

              limits or some other particular factor.

                       Were going to do a pretty detailed

              look at household activity and particularly

              heating costs by census division.  We

              collected a lot of that data from our own

              RECS survey and from other sources of data

              and we're going to highlight those, too.

                       I think Howard mentioned this but








              we are hoping to have the testing finished

              by late fall of this year.  We have tasks

              out there that are going to begin to be

              used to get the estimation done.  We have

              done a lot of work in getting the database

              together.  We still have a few little

              things to do there.

                       We hope to be doing the short-term

              forecast on a limited regional basis, this

              basis that I just mentioned, in early 2005.

              I don't know if that means January or

              February or March.  Hopefully one of those

              three will do but well continue to release

              it on a monthly basis.  That's the goal.

                       Any expanded regional coverage

              will be in our PC downloadable model, too,

              and also we'll feature it on the web in as

              much as detail as we can reasonable do.  I

              think that's it.

                       MR. BREIDT:  We have a quick turn-

              around between our breakout sessions and

              rather than cut into this next breakout








              session we can just go directly into it,

              take some time out at the break as

              necessary and get back in here at 10:40 for

              the ASA summaries of those discussions.

                       So as far as breakouts does

              everybody know which breakouts they are in?

              So Mark Bernstein, Neha, Nagaraj, and Nick

              will stay here and the rest of us will be

              going down the hall.

                            (Recess)

                       MR. TSENG:  My name is Phillip

              Tseng.  This morning I will talk about some

              of the statistical and modeling issues

              facing the regional short-term energy

              outlook in model building.  So I'll briefly

              discuss some of the reasons I think Howard

              and Dave Costello mentioned about the

              regional model.  I'll just list a few

              reasons why we need a regional model.  I'll

              briefly describe the regional

              representation of the model and some of the

              statistical issues in modeling the market








              and modeling the electricity demand and

              supply.

                       Why do we need a regional model?

              I think Dave mentioned earlier national

              data cannot capture adequately into action

              soft market demand and supply because we

              aggregate too many things and sometimes the

              price variations in a demand response to

              those differences in prices also are not

              captured in the national model.  So we

              figured we probably can get more insight

              when we do the regional model.

                       Many relevant questions cannot be

              addressed by a national model.  For

              example, when we talk about winter heating

              fuel demand and supply in the northeast,

              like Howard mentioned, and differences in

              regional natural gas prices sometimes we

              have bottlenecks and we like to capture

              that as well.

                       Summer gasoline demand and supply

              in California, so if we understand the








              regional market we may be able to

              understand what happens in terms of

              products, in terms of crude oil supply, and

              action between different regions.

                       So a regional model provides that

              kind of information.  Also electricity

              generation and transmission issues, this is

              a tough one.  We were doing the regional

              basically trying to understand some of the

              basic elements and hopefully as our

              understanding of the transmission issues

              evolve using this regional model we may be

              able to improve even further in the future.

                       The regional representation of the

              model, some of this representation we

              simply use available data and we may

              aggregate it.  So for electricity demand we

              have four census regions and electricity

              supply we have seven NERC-based regions,

              seven or eight.  I think we are still

              debating.  For natural gas demand we have

              four census regions.  For natural gas








              supply we may use six producing regions,

              looking into the difficulties or

              implementation issues, and we have three

              storage regions, inventory regions.

                       For petroleum products we have

              data for five PADD regions and we may focus

              on petroleum product demand and supply on

              maybe east coast and west coast but in

              general we have information for all five

              PADD regions and we can probably answer a

              lot of questions there.

                       This is a kind of simple way to

              look at it, the four census regions.  We

              have ten regions here but really we are

              looking at northeast, midwest, west, and

              south.  These are the four regions we try

              to model.

                       For the electricity regions I

              mentioned about seven regions and it could

              be eight.  It depends on how we gather the

              information and how we analyze the results.

              So the eight regions could be New York,








              Florida, Texas, California, New England

              regions, Midwest, east central,

              mid-Atlantic and southwest as one so we

              have eight regions.  Actually Dave's people

              started collecting the information.  We

              have developed a database so we can start

              doing some testing.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  What I notice is

              that some of the region boundaries are

              going through the states like Virginia and

              Iowa.

                       MR. TSENG:  That's correct because

              we follow the NERC definition of the

              regions.  What we may have to do is for

              some regions and for some technologies we

              may collect state data and then decide how

              to fix them.

                       Hydro, actually when we look at

              states looks pretty good but when we look

              at the NERC regions we may have to split

              some of the capacity in generating.  So we

              were looking to the data management issue








              and making some decisions once we start

              doing the econometric analysis.  So that's

              the general idea of the census demand and

              power generation regions.

                       The next topic I'll talk about is

              statistical issues in modeling the market.

              Actually my discussion here is very short

              because when I was trying to understand the

              modeling structure a lot of issues were not

              really clear to me.  That's why I think the

              ASA committee can help a lot in terms of

              clarifying some of the statistical issues,

              some econometric issues, and some of the

              modeling issues as well.

                       In the integrated energy model

              I've got two key elements here.  Fewer

              market representations, that's one level,

              and sectoral components of demand.  That's

              another level.  These elements need to be

              integrated in a way that optimizes the

              model in terms of the performance of the

              model in predicting energy consumption and








              prices and providing valuable insights in

              identifying the determinants of energy

              demand and supply.

                       From the modeling point of view I

              think Dave's solution algorithm basically

              indicates you have macro or exogenous

              variable drive demand and then demand and

              supply integrate.  Then we solved the

              model.  But when we estimate the model

              there's a statistical issue and econometric

              issue.  When we look at national data, like

              market data, market demand and supply, and

              we look at the components, regional demand

              and supply, somehow there's consistency on

              how do we estimate the system in a way we

              can capture some of the constraint within

              the system.

                       For example, recently we looked at

              natural gas price and we heard the term

              "industrial  and natural gas demand

              destruction."  Part of the reason is supply

              is not there and somehow the market system








              has to allocate available resources to

              different end users.  So there's a market

              competing mechanism and we hope we can

              understand the mechanism.

                       So when we estimate the accretion

              systems we can capture some of the

              interactions so when we do the forecasts we

              can actually reflect some of the reality in

              the framework.  So those are the issues we

              are facing that we are trying to understand

              the market as well as the meaning of

              statistics.

                       One example is when we look at a

              market we simply look at market demand, the

              fuel market.  We look at natural gas, we

              look at electricity, or we look at

              petroleum products.  So we have demand and

              we have supply and then we also know the

              capacity.  The capacity information could

              be in the electricity sector.  It could

              also be in the supply sector like natural

              gas supply.  It has certain limits in terms








              of what's the boundary in the near term to

              push the production.

                       That limits determining the

              allocation of resources within the system

              in the near term.  So the adopted approach

              to model of fuel market must satisfy

              factors that determine the market demand

              and supply of a few so when we look at a

              fuel market we must capture that aspect.

                       Also if we want to understand

              prices specification of the demand and

              supply equations must allow models to

              identify the equations econometrically.

              This is an identification issue.  Sometimes

              we say we are trying to estimate equations

              using some kind of reduced form.

                       Then the question is how do we

              interpret the meaning of the reduced form

              equation when we want to do forecasting or

              do we need to really understand the implied

              parameters when we use the reduced form and

              so we say we identify the equations and we








              meet certain conditions so the reduced form

              equation will provide the kind of

              predictability to serve our purposes.  But

              that's the kind of thing I think will be

              helpful to know.

                       On the demand side we look at the

              sector demand representation.  There are

              many ways to estimate the demand.  For

              example, if we look at residential demand

              it could have three different types of

              demand for residential fuel.

                       For example, we can look at

              natural gas, electricity, and petroleum.

              Do they compete?  I think some of the

              comments I heard is in the residential

              sector in the near term maybe efficiency

              improvement could be captured in the model

              specification; however, inter-fuel

              competition like fuel switching may not.

                       But in the industrial sector or in

              the electricity sector we could see a lot

              of fuel switching.  So that's another area








              we're interested to understand and

              hopefully, we can do some econometric

              testing and understand for each sector what

              happens there.

                       Of course, for the residential

              sector we can also use micro data, can

              offline do some analysis and then to

              understand what happens in terms of near-

              term market demand and fuel switching.

                       So basically I covered some of the

              issues, why we do the short-term regional

              modeling and some of the regional

              representations, some of the statistical

              issues facing us looking at market demand

              and supply, and now I'll look at

              electricity market demand and supply.

                       We want to understand the regional

              market.  Part of the reason is the regional

              energy demand in the electricity sector can

              have an impact on natural gas which can

              actually affect the natural gas storage,

              which in turn affects winter heating fuel








              availability for households using natural

              gas.

                       So that's why we are focusing a

              little bit more on the electricity and then

              we are trying to change the representation

              a little bit.  The demand for electricity

              actually varies by the hour.  Peak demand

              imposes more burden on generation

              transmission.  I think there's some data

              for some of the California independent

              system operators.  They will release their

              system load, projected system load, and

              they would actually plot the load curve and

              we can see between 12:00 o'clock midnight

              and 5:00 o'clock in the morning demand for

              electricity is pretty flat.  Then it ramps

              up and usually it peaks around 3:00 or

              5:00 o'clock in the afternoon.

                       So the burden on the system is

              different when we look at different times

              of the day.  So a regional approach may

              allow modelers to assess potential








              bottlenecks in generation and transmission.

              Given the model structure and the regional

              representation this is the first attempt.

              We think once we have a better handle of

              the regional representation and the flow

              information we can probably improve the

              application of this methodology even better

              in the future.

                       Generation capacity in each region

              and state can help the estimation of

              electricity costs.  That's another element,

              I think.  If we understand different types

              of technologies we can actually estimate

              the margin of cost of producing

              electricities.

                       Load curves and state or regional

              electricity generating capacity will be

              used to determine dispatching.  Fewer

              choices in marginal costs of producing

              electricity, that's the design of this new

              modeling structure we are trying to

              implement.








                       I'll use California as an example

              to illustrate the importance of load curves

              on dispatching decisions.  But since it's

               some of the numbers I will just show a

              few examples here.

                       This is California average hourly

              sales of electricity by month in 2002.  So

              what I did here is I simply used EIA

              published data, monthly electricity sales,

              and that converted to a daily number.

                       For this number I think the

              important thing is we see the range of

              hourly sales of electricity derived from

              monthly data in California just centered

              around 20.75 gigawatt hours.  The level is

              not very high.  The highest hourly demand

              was in July, about 31 gigawatt hours, and

              the lowest one was like in November, around

              24 gigawatt hours.

                       I'll show you what I've got.  This

              is basically downloaded data from

              California ISOs and this is in March.  The








              previous chart, you can see, March and

              November are pretty low but when you look

              at demand for electricity by the hour even

              in March it actually exceeded 30 gigawatt

              hours.  So that shows the importance of the

              hourly demand, that it actually can have an

              impact on dispatching.

                       Another example here, this is also

              from California, actual system load in

              July.  Now, the numbers actually exceeded

              35 gigawatt hours.  So there's a

              distribution and for some months in July

              generation actually exceeded like 40

              gigawatt hours.

                       I think during the California

              crisis demand for electricity was higher

              than that.  Also on planned outage, besides

              the planned outage, on planned outage it

              also reduced the supply capacity.  As a

              result California experienced some

              difficulties.

                       So looking at those load curves








              and looking at California generating

              capacity by primary energy source in 2002

              you can see California has some nuclears,

              quite a lot of hydroelectric, and a lot of

              natural gas.  They are renewables, dual-

              fired units, some petroleum and a little

              bit coal.  Its interesting.  Coal doesn't

              play a significant role in California.

                       Yes?

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I assume this does

              not include imports into California?

                       MR. TSENG:  This is generation

              capacity in California.  For this one when

              California reports the planned capacity

              that includes generation capacity plus

              imports.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Right, it

              particularly includes generation that's

              owned by California utilities in other

              states.  It's dedicated transmission.  So

              what your histogram is missing is capacity

              that is actually owned by California








              utilities that have actual dedicated

              transmission lines to them.

                       MR. TSENG:  That's correct.  The

              information I collected, the total

              capacity, the number here, if you add up

              the numbers its about 56 gigawatt capacity.

              So that's the total capacity in California.

                       But in any given month the

              available capacity, for example, when I

              visit the website I look at the numbers in

              July, especially this one.  I actually

              could see the available generating capacity

              on March 8, 2004, was 42 gigawatts and that

              includes imports.

                       So some planned outage in lieu of

              out of service and as a result I think in

              terms of the planning part of the reason we

              see the difference in load curve and

              difference in seasonal available capacity

              that all can play a role in terms of

              meeting the electricity demand.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  My point is just








              don't forget when you are doing the

              regional stuff because you've got

              generation in other places that is actually

              owned by so it is imports but it's actually

              capacity owned by utilities in the state

              and that is different than importing

              electricity on a spot basis or a contract

              basis.

                       MR. TSENG:  That's why we have

              regions and we will try to capture those

              but still in terms of our definition we

              will try to say if those power plants are

              not in California California will be

              getting it from another region or state.

                       Thanks for pointing that out.  It

              may not be an issue because our region may

              be more aggregated but for California I

              think this is a good point and we will

              definitely pay a little bit more attention

              to that area.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  What this

              suggests to the least is that you need to








              have very careful modeling of the

              transmission.  I mean, it could be  as

              long as the transmission from Oregon to

              California is well modeled we can account

              for it.  That's one of the difficulties

              here is the interplay between regions.

                       MR. TSENG:  The transmission part,

              the power flow information is not available

              anywhere.  So that's why we want to use the

              regional model as a way to understand the

              potential power flows.

                       Again, when we look at the

              regional aggregation we integrated some of

              the issues or assumed away some of the

              transmission issues.  So when you say we

              want to see what happens, where California

              will get electricity from different

              regions, say from Washington State or

              Oregon through the hydropower plants we may

              be able to look into that.

                       But there are some other issues

              which can be interesting such as when








              California will get the imported

              electricity.  The time of the day affects

              the type of fuel used to generate

              electricity.  We think in the bigger

              picture that's one area well be looking at

              as well.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Let's let him

              finish and then he can answer.

                       MR. TSENG:  I'm almost done here

              and then I can answer questions.  So I

              think when we do regional modeling a lot of

              times the first question is do you have the

              data.  For the electricity part I think

              fortunately we do and some of the

              consultants do, at least like the load

              curve stuff.

                       So data are available to create

              load curves.  I think that's one thing we

              know, like the ISOs, the independent system

              operators and some of the RTOs, like PJMs.

              They have information and some electricity

              modeling consultants actually purchase that








              information so we do have almost like by

              state.  So we plenty utilize that

              information.

                       So the EIA  historic monthly

              electricity sales set up by region and will

              be used to create load curves.  This is a

              process we use as typical macro drivers.

              Exogenous variables drive the demand and

              then we have the monthly demand and then we

              convert the monthly demand to a load curve.

              Then we try to model the dispatching.

              That's the general approach.

                       There are available to create

              electricity supply curves.  I think EIA

              actually has very good information and also

              we can actually get the O&M cost and we can

              get fuel cost so we can actually create

              margin of costs of electricity supply from

              different technologies.  Then the

              dispatching algorithm can be applied to

              that.  So the state regional demand and

              generation will help us check the flow








              information.  That's the part I think is an

              attempt.

                       We try to understand the flow

              information but actually Dr. Hale sitting

              in the audience is an expert.  He just

              completed a report and he gave the

              committee a briefing last time.  There are

              a lot of issues in terms of checking the

              flows, in terms of collecting and

              processing the information.

                       So what we are doing here is a

              first step.  Were not saying this approach

              is perfect but at least this approach will

              allow us to get a handle of looking at the

              potential flows, looking at the

              relationship between load curve and

              generating capacity and possible

              electricity flow.

                       So a few questions for the

              committee.  The regional short-term

              forecasting is designed for the short- term

              forecast so should we use a system of








              equations approach in our estimation of

              model parameters?  I mentioned earlier

              because we are looking at demand equations

              in each region and so exact demand issues

              in terms of how do we estimate demand.

                       Also there's an overarching market

              so there's a statistical consistency issue

              when we estimate the equation system how do

              we estimate the system and how much do we

              lose if we simply use an easy approach to

              estimate the equation just on the demand

              side?

                       Also I think the supply side we

              are looking into it and it may take some

              time and maybe we can raise some of the

              issues next time.  So that's the issue.

                       The second one is how do we handle

              the linkage between regional demand and

              supply.

                       Dave's flow chart identifies an

              algorithm but what we want to be able to

              solve or estimate equation system is to








              ensure that the linkage when we estimate a

              system the top numbers, the market numbers,

              price, market clearing, demand and supply,

              are consistent with the regional demand and

              supply.  Even though we are not solving the

              regional market still we need to understand

              the consistency issue.

                       In the electricity sector

              aggregation effectively flatten the

              regional load curves so the more regions we

              have the flatter the load curve which be.

              So we would like to get some guidance in

              terms of some criteria for the selection of

              the number of regions even though we look

              at supply regions with seven or eight and

              when I started talking to people some

              people say when you aggregate regions don't

              include midwest with other regions because

              mid west has a lot of excess capacity.  So

              if you aggregate midwest with Atlantic

              States then you don't have any problems in

              terms of supply and potential flow.  So








              those are the issues we are looking into.

                       Hopefully next time we will have

              some empirical data to report.  Thanks,

              that concludes my presentation.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Thank you.

              Phillip, did you have a question?

                       MS. KHANNA:  About transmission

              flows I understood that information is not

              available but I wonder if it should be

              available with the ISO at least.  There

              must be some place within the grid where

              someone is tracking flows of electricity

              from source to end use.

                       Maybe it's not easy to correct but

              it should be there in the system somewhere.

              I think that if transmission is the issue

              then maybe that's what we need to do to try

              to figure out an approach.

                       MR. TSENG:  The transmission flow,

              we actually had four focus group meetings

              and Mr. Bradsher-Frederick will give a talk

              about some of the findings.  Actually I was








              involved in that project.  What we found

              out from the stakeholders is it involves

              different levels of data collection and

              analysis.

                       From the stakeholders people say

              they want to collect information for

              different power lines.  For example, EIA

              collects 230 KB lines and some 115 KB lines

              but some stakeholders, especially at the

              state level, people are looking at 69 KB

              lines.

                       In some states it's treated as

              transmission lines but in New York it's

              distribution lines.  So you are talking

              about a host of information which would be

              very difficult to process.

                       I think another theme I'm pointing

              to, Dr. Hale, he has a model.  He actually

              worked with a consortium of professors to

              develop a power world model basically

              looking at the flow information.  The

              question is how do we integrate empirical








              data with the modeling framework.  That's

              another layer.  Its a lot more complicated.

              For the regional model I think one issue is

              the turn-around time is one month so we

              need to basically manage the information

              system and estimate the  system in such

              a way it will not overburden the team who

              will produce the report every month.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Looking at the two

              days of data you showed, the natural

              question that came to my mind was is the

              availability the same throughout.  I see

              that the level is different from March to

              July, the level of load, but is the

              availability the same?

                       MR. TSENG:  The availability is

              not the same.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Not the same

              without the changes or the --

                       MR. TSENG:  Right, I think the

              interesting pattern we actually have

              probably five or six years historical data








              basically looking at hourly information and

              that I think the burden on the load becomes

              more severe if you have a heat wave like

              say five or six days in a row of very hot

              weather because the first day or second day

              doesn't impose a load but when the

              buildings are heated up the demand for

              cooling will increase.

                       That can really drive up the

              demand for electricity in the afternoon.

              That imposes a burden on the power

              generators and the transmission.  But what

              we are trying to do is we want to first

              capture some of that element and see how we

              can improve our understanding of the

              system.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Now, for example,

              the March data and July data, if you look

              at the largest load minus the smallest load

              for the 24-hour period of time it is about

              4-5 kilowatts, about.

                       MR. TSENG:  I used that as an








              example to show the variation but I

              actually downloaded another day, like July

              and other times in California, and actually

              the actual loads in the afternoon was close

              to 40 gigawatt hours.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  We had 42 gigawatt

              hours two weeks ago with some stage one

              emergency stuff so it can vary a lot.

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, it can vary a

              lot.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  The other question

              or comment I have is that the last bullet

              in your presentation about the number of

              regions, one thing I was thinking, if there

              is  until you have very good

              quantitative data about transmission at

              least qualitatively when you are doing the

              regions you should take the transmission

              flow into account.  Are any of the region

              definitions based on the transmission flow?

                       MR. TSENG:  No, actually there's

              no flow information.  Some people requested








              EIA use the FERC-1 information to create

              flow information; however, when we talked

              to some of the users of the data some

              people say how relevant is that because

              some analysts look at the congestion issues

              at control areas, which is very different

              from the market area or the state level or

              the region.

                       So the congestion could be very

              local and the flow information we see is

              probably just an indicator.  Really,

              there's no way the kind of modeling we are

              doing at the regional level would pinpoint

              the congestion point.

                       But the interesting part is a lot

              of people working on the transmission

              trying to understand the congestion and

              some of the implications of reliability and

              market power don't have any idea about what

              kind of data would be needed to do the

              analysis.  So what we are doing here is at

              least one step forward and trying to








              identify the demand and supply and some

              potential flow information.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I really need to

              take a step back here and ask a very

              fundamental question.  That's what are you

              trying to get out of the short-term energy

              forecasts?  Actually in the presentation so

              far are we trying to get to be able to look

              out the next month or the next few months

              prices or are we trying to get reliability?

                       What is the goal of the short-term

              energy forecasts and therefore the reason

              for the regional breakdown?  Because if you

              are trying to do anything about whether

              there will be supplied and the ability to

              be supplied that's one thing.  If you are

              strictly just saying here are going to be

              the trends and prices that's another thing

              altogether.  Do you understand the

              question?

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, I understand the

              question.  Part of the reason we want to








              understand the field use pattern in the

              power generation sector is it's a very

              important element.  I was trying to show

              you the generating capacity, the base load

              and the peak load.  If we don't model the

              dispatching pattern then we don't know

              exactly the field usage.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Going upstream

              from that, what are you trying to  what

              do you really want to get out and what is

              the information that you really need to

              have out of this for the short-term energy

              outlook?  That's the fundamental question.

              If we are worried about whether there's

              going to be sufficient electricity supplied

              that's one thing.  You're not going to do

              that.  That's one thing.

                       Then we need to worry about

              transmission.  But if we're not worried

              about that then  what are you really

              trying to get at?  What's your objective?

                       MR. TSENG:  The objective here is








              really to do a good accounting of demand

              and supply, especially in the natural gas

              market.  That's why I said well, is there a

              consistency between the market and demand.

                       So I use electricity as one

              example.  You say well, we don't capture

              transmission issues but we do capture

              dispatching decisions.  If somehow after we

              analyze the historical data hydropower is

              used as both base load and load shaving

              that could have a lot of impact on demand

              for electricity.  California has a lot of

              electricity, has combined cycle.

                       So if we can even shave the demand

              for natural gas slightly looking at the

              dispatching decision you can change the

              demand and you can change the underground

              storage of this in the summer.  That could

              have an impact in the winter in terms of

              heating fuel demand because in the

              northeast natural gas and the number two

              heating fuel will be used to provide








              heating needs.

                       So what we want is we want to be

              able to check the flow of demand for fuels

              and supply of fuels and understand what

              happens in terms of demand and supply in

              storage and then look at those

              relationships in terms of prices and

              markets.

                       So does that answer your question?

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Most of the way.

                       MR. CARUSO:  One of the things

              that I think both Howard and I were struck

              with when we first got here after is the

              number of questions we were getting both

              from the executive branch and the

              congressional branch whenever there was a

              discontinuity or a potential discontinuity

              in supply or demand and price spikes.

                       And the fact is we couldn't answer

              a lot of them because there was no regional

              detail in the short-term model and, to put

              it as far upstream as you can go, basically








              the Secretary wants to know what's going to

              happen in California, I mean, first

              starting with the crisis in electricity but

              in natural gas and now more recently

              gasoline prices.  We have been asked to do

              analysis on both the west coast and the

              east coast on gasoline so those are --

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  So the initial

              focus appears to be natural gas and

              gasoline?

                       MR. TSENG:  And also heating fuel.

              However, heating fuel competes with natural

              gas as well even in the northeast.  This is

              an empirical question and we will do some

              empirical analysis there.

                       Part of the reason I talk about

              electricity and you say well, it doesn't

              answer the question about transmission

              bottlenecks, it's correct; however, the

              algorithm, what gave us a better

              understanding of how natural gas power

              plants would be used to serve the load, and








              that information can help us understand how

              natural gas will be used not only in

              California but also in other regions

              because in recent years I think natural gas

              demand for power generation actually

              increased by almost 2 quads, the gas

              combined cycle.  A lot of the new gas

              combined cycles just came on line in the

              past several years and that increased

              demand for natural gas and so how natural

              gas power plants are used especially for

              intermediate load and peak load can have an

              impact on natural gas storage because now

              the market is very tight and sometimes

              people say well, the forecasting error is

              maybe one percent or two percent.

                       When we look at a 100 quad, the

              common energy system, one percent is one

              quad.  If it's in the coal supply or coal

              demand it may not matter but if it is

              natural gas then you're talking from $4 or

              $5 per MCF to $12 per MCF or even higher.








                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  So is the vision

              here to be able to say that this winter if

              you really have this up and going because

              of expectations of electricity use and

              natural gas use for electricity and state

              of storage that there could be a shortage

              of natural gas for heating in the

              wintertime?

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, that could be one

              outcome because we do a much more rigid

              accounting of the demand for natural gas.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  That definitely

              has to come from a region.  That has to be

              a regional difference?

                       MR. TSENG:  Right, yes.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Sorry to take up

              your time with that but it really makes a

              difference on what it is you are trying to

              do.  You have asked three very specific

              questions that maybe we should try to

              address.

                       The first one is should we use a








              system of equations approach.  What's the

              alternative?  Is there an alternative?

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  I'm not an

              economist and that's where my failings are.

              But I understand this is a very detailed

              economic trick of modeling that you have

              done.  A statistician would simply look at

              the data and say I have a vector of prices

              and a vector of supplies and the question

              is can we model on the black box without

              going  supplies and demand curve?

              Simply can I get some model that explains

              how these prices move maybe in conjunction

              with the supplies and maybe heat degree

              days or other exogenous variables?

                       That would be an acceptable

              approach but it doesn't have the same

              flavor, the understanding that you are

              gaining, from the econometric model;

              however, for forecasting if I need to

              predict what is going to be the prices a

              few months down the road that might be a








              very acceptable solution.

                       So Mark's question, what do you

              want to do, what is the customer asking

              you, is fundamental.  I mean, that is

              indeed the first question one has to ask.

                       MR. TSENG:  Right.  Some of the

              questions I heard or you read in the press

              could be are petroleum refiners gouging the

              customers, why the price is $2.50 per

              gallon in some areas.  So just pure

              statistic analysis will not give the why

              and that's the part we are looking, market

              demand and supply.  Sometimes we add

              additional information in terms of

              distribution system bottlenecks.  For

              example, a few years ago I think that there

              was really no natural gas shortage per se

              but the midwest and northeast had a cold

              spell.

                       What happened was natural gas

              producers in the south said well, I'm going

              to send as much as natural gas as possible.








              They passed certain processing steps.

              Normally natural gas coming out of a well

              will go through a natural gas plant and we

              call it coming out of a well is wet gas and

              you strip the liquids and you send the dry

              gas through the pipeline.

                       But when the demand is very high,

              what happens is some of the gas producers

              simply send the natural gas through the

              pipeline and when you reach north it will

              liquefy.  So it actually jammed the

              pipeline and so it made the situation even

              worse.

                       So that's the kind of thing I

              think especially for our administrator when

              he has to testify.  People will not say

              what happened.  Something is wrong and

              people are not sending natural gas to the

              north.  That's why prices going through the

              roof.  So the statistic is one thing and

              also some of the meaning associated with

              the numbers is important.








                       DR. HENGARTNER:  The other

              question the statistician will ask is how

              many parameters are you estimating.  You

              say you have 180 equations.  One parameter,

              maybe two, per equation, are we are talking

              about 600 parameters easily?

                       MR. TSENG:  But some of the

              general form or generic form equations are

              more or less the same.  Demand equations

              could be very similar.  Only the value of

              the parameter will be different.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Yes, so you need

              to estimate those values from the data.

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, we do, right.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  So if you have

              600 parameters you need to estimate how

              many independent "or" observations do you

              have?  Is it even feasible to do it?

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  I think

              econometrics  identifiability 

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Well,

              identifiability is one issue but even if it








              is identifiable do we have enough data?

                       MS. KHANNA:  Is it a robust

              estimate?  That's what you're looking at.

                       MR. TSENG:  Dave, correct me.

              Dave knows a lot more about data.  I think

              from '97 we have monthly data, '97 through

              2002 or 2003, right?

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Just to clarify

              this, currently we have data going back as

              far as 1975 by month.  But on a consistent

              basis for the variables that we cover,

              which are mostly national level flows,

              stocks, prices, I would say that most of

              the data begins monthly in about 1987.

                       Now, some of this electricity data

              that we are talking about, right now we

              just finished building the first part of

              the database we are going to use here and

              it doesn't get into the load curve stuff

              because that's another matter.

                       But just in terms of the flows,

              the generation numbers by region and by








              fuel source, we update it from January of

              1989 through today, through the latest

              month, which is December of 2003.

                       We also have capacity by month, by

              fuel, by region although, looking at that

              data, it needs to be cleaned up a little

              bit.  Of course, we maintain everything on

              a per day basis.  We don't put any flows on

              anything other than a per day basis because

              it's silly not to.  But, anyway, there's a

              lot of data there and probably more than

              you usually see on EIA's website because

              it's hard to get all that historical data

              and we are putting more into it.

                       But to me one of the questions

              that this brings up, and I think it's

              pertinent to what I think Phil was getting

              at, is let me give you an example.  The

              question of natural gas, in order for us to

              do a natural gas modeling effort here we've

              got to have natural gas from the different

              sectors.  That means residential,








              commercial, and industrial.  And the other

              big sector is electric power.  So in order

              to know what the total amount of natural

              gas is we've got to obviously do that.  So

              we do it.

                       Now, there are two levels of this

              question of identification, I think, that

              are relevant here.  One is the question of

              well, how are we going to get to the

              equilibrium price, so-called.  How do we

              get a flavor for what that is?

                       The approach that I am trying to

              sell here is that we ought to look at,

              first of all, the natural gas market in the

              United states is pretty well integrated.

              You have in general the pressure on prices

              at the wellhead, that is, in the producing

              region is affected by just about everything

              else that happens, demand in the northeast,

              supplies from Alberta, Chicago market

              demand, all that stuff.

                       It's not perfectly integrated








              because there are places where there are

              transmission bottlenecks and so forth.  But

              what we are trying to sell or what I'm

              trying to sell is we take all these

              demands.  We calculate them by region.  We

              add them all up.

                       Now, the issue I think Phil was

              focusing on was more the question of how we

              get the fuel demands appropriately, and

              there are some transmission issues, too,

              but the fuel demands appropriately out of

              all these regions and that includes the

              electric power sector.

                       We add them all up.  That gives us

              a total requirement for natural gas.  We

              also are tracking inventories.  We have to

              worry about inventory behavior a little

              bit.  But even if we just assume, as seems

              to be the case, whatever inventories end up

              at the end of the winter there is a very

              strong propensity for them to get back

              close to normal.








                       We notice that, for example, the

              variance at the beginning of the heating

              season is much lower than at the end

              because of the fact that in other words

              it's not one of these things where its a

              really cold winter and you wind up with low

              stocks, oh, we are going to be stuck with

              low stocks for the year.  That's not the

              way it works.

                       Gas utilities have a lot of

              requirements and they are basically going

              to put the  so even if we just assumed

              that well, they are going to get back to

              normal pretty soon that adds to the amount

              of flow for natural gas we have to worry

              about.

                       Anyway, there's a total

              requirement for new supply that comes out

              of this.  On the other hand, we have to say

              well, how does new production come about.

              Well, we look at drilling and so on and so

              forth and what's available from Canada.








                       At that aggregate level we could

              just simply say we need to have

              equilibrium.  What will happen is that the

              price will be the price but equilibrates

              this aggregate demand for supply.  We are

              looking at the Henry Hub prices as a

              benchmark price.

                       What's an alternative to that?  As

              an alternative we are just adding up all

              these things and forcing it to do a demand

              supply equilibration and give a price,

              which is essentially what we are doing now.

              One alternative is to say well, okay, we

              can characterize the market model as a

              supply, basically estimate a supply

              function, and also a demand function in the

              aggregate and worry about recovering the

              structural parameters for that system.

                       That gives an answer.  Depending

              on how complicated it is it gives an answer

              for spot prices.  It gives an answer for

              the actual level of demand and it gives an








              answer for inventories, probably; however,

              that's an answer that may not be the same

              as what we just finished doing at the

              regional level to add up.  It's nice

              because we can say we have these

              well-identified specified structural

              parameters for demand and supply for

              natural gas in the United states.  We could

              take that and allocate it back in some form

              to the regions or we could just do the

              other thing.  That's one question, I think,

              that we are talking about here.

                       The other question has to do with

              if you are back down at the regional level

              again and if you are worrying about, lets

              say, and we do not do this right now and we

              may not do it but it's another one of

              Phil's questions, I think, if we look at,

              say, residential energy demand and leave

              out gasoline but we are really just talking

              about electricity and heating fuels we

              could specify it as a system in which,








              first of all, we could do an overall

              sectoral energy demand function as part of

              a system that says well, the energy demands

              are one set of inputs in industrial or one

              set of goods consumers get as opposed to

              others and there would be some

              substitutional elasticities in there.

                       Once you determine that then you

              have to worry about substitutions between

              fuels which we can figure in the

              residential sector in the short run there's

              not a lot of that but there may be some.

              So there's the question of whether to

              estimate those functions in that way.

                       The alternative is simply to have

              an equation that we have for natural gas

              demand in the residential sector and we

              know a lot of things that affect this.  One

              of the things is the housing

              characteristics in the region, which we are

              going to track, in other words how many of

              these households have natural gas  so








              on and so forth.

                       We know what the weather is.

              That's obviously a big factor and these

              prices will be important, too.  So we put

              those in there.  We use ordinarily

              two-stage least squares, what method.

                       Sometimes it doesn't look like it

              makes a whole lot of difference.  But for

              me, and this is just because of my focus,

              for me whatever we do we want to do the

              regions because we want to know more about

              particularly how those things change.

                       How do you explain how you got

              this total gas on hand?  I mean, you have

              an aggregate equation and that's fine and

              maybe it seems to fit reasonably well but

              you couldn't tell anybody where it came

              from.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I don't think

              there's any issue with going  the

              question is how complicated do you need to

              get.  How detailed do you need to get?  I








              think it still comes back to what your

              goals are and what you are really trying to

              get out of the model and then asking

              yourself how do you do it in a way that's

              going to be understandable but at the same

              time doable in the time frame that you need

              to deal with.  One of the questions is are

              you getting too complicated.  The other

              question is well, don't you have to.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I'm actually having a

              hard time trying to answer the first

              question, whether to use the system of

              equations  versus two-stage least

              squares because a priori without knowing

              the data or your structural model I can't

              answer that.  It depends on those  do

              you expect there to be an  or

              simultaneity problem and the second is a

              statistical question.  If so, is it really

              a statistical issue?  So I don't think you

              can answer those in a vacuum.

                       I mean, people like you who








              actually deal with the data in the model

              probably if you give us a little more

              insight into why you are even asking this

              question from an econometrics point of view

              maybe we can give you a more informed

              answer.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I think there's

              not enough time at the moment to actually

              provide that.

                       MR. TSENG:  I think in terms of

              asking more specific questions we will have

              more because right now we are still

              collecting information.  Dave has someone

              collecting the information.  When we

              actually start estimating the equations

              well probably know more about the

              statistical issues and also econometric

              issues because we could start doing a

              different kind of statistical test.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I think perhaps we

              may need to wait to try to address some of

              those questions for the fall after you have








              actually gotten some 

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  I have a few more

              questions about the data.  It's beautiful

              that you can do the electricity on an

              hourly basis but a lot of the other

              variables you measure are not on an hourly

              basis.  They are probably not even on a

              daily basis.  I mean you say some of them

              you have on a daily basis but very few --

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Oh, no, none of the

              flows that we have are actually day by day

              observations.  When I say daily I mean

              divide by the number of days in the month.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  That complicates

              your equation greatly.  The only data

              that's available is what you have in a

              month and you divide by the number of days

              in a month.  This very detailed modeling

              might be extremely hard to do because you

              have this additional source of error.  It's

              errors in variables, using proxies instead

              of the actually numbers.








                       MR. COSTELLO:  Well, I think what

              were really talking about here, I mean, I'm

              not really sure ultimately how the form

              ought to come out.  I think Phil has a

              little bit better idea than I do but it's

              going to derive at some point.  What I

              think they are talking about is if we have

              enough information over time of the typical

              load curve in a given month for all of the

              regions then we can in a sense build an

              understanding of a typical day in a month

              and how it changes under different

              conditions.  One of my goals is to make

              sure that when we do a forecast we don't

              have to intervene every time to retool for

              a different configuration.  Do you see what

              I'm saying?

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  I see what you

              are saying.  I think what the customer will

              want is exactly an atypical day.  It's if a

              heat wave hits and the prices go through

              the roofs I think that will need to be








              understood.

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Well, actually what

              I meant by that, I said that wrong.  If we

              have enough actual observations of days

              within months across time then the hope is

              that we can get an idea of how that shape

              does change under different conditions,

              particularly things like weather.  That's

              the big one but there are other factors,

              too.  I mean, that's the idea.

                       The only purpose for doing it

              other than getting to the possibility of

              adding to the transmission problem question

              to me is the hope that being able to look

              at it this way will provide better month to

              month estimates of changes in fuel shares

              per generation.  That's the key thing.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  So that's an

              important, very good focused goal that I

              think we need to help you.  If that's your

              goal you need to define your approach to

              meet your goal and I'm not sure that that's








              being done.

                       One of the other questions you

              asked is criteria for selecting numbers of

              regions.  One of the things maybe you

              noticed when you looked at the flow charts

              in California is that the peak is not the

              middle of the afternoon.  California's

              summer and wintertime electricity peak now

              is between 6:00 and 7:00 o'clock in the

              evening.

                       That is a relatively recent shift.

              You can watch if you go back in time and

              you have track load curves in the last 10

              years.  You can watch that peak move from

              3:00 o'clock 10 years ago slowly, slowly

              across  I saw a nice simulation of

              that, actually, at some point.

                       Clearly, looking at load curves to

              make that determination you have to look at

              existing load curves in different regions

              and different states and not combine

              regions where the load curves are








              complementary.  What you don't want to do

              is combine a summer peaking and a winter

              peaking or stick California in with a state

              that has traditional 3:00 o'clock peak.

              What you would end up doing is then you

              lose the variation.

                       So while there are no criteria to

              say specifically you can think about

              looking at existing load curves trying to

              rate the regions that have similar

              patterns.  I'm not sure if any other state

              has a similar pattern to California 

              but it hasn't changed decision making but

              it ought to but it certainly ought to

              change the forecast.

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, actually part of

              the reason we are looking at California and

              New York, Florida, and Texas separately is

              because those are very distinct states or

              regions.  So definitely we'll look at the

              data very carefully and decide how we want

              to aggregate.








                       The session is over.  Thank you.

                            (Recess)

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Actually we had a

              very interesting session.  I want to thank

              Phil and David for filling in things.  I

              think we came to a couple of conclusions.

              One is that they are really early in the

              process and we need to revisit some of the

              stuff in the fall as they actually get some

              of the analysis done.

                       One of the particular issues that

              I had was defining the objectives for the

              short-term energy outlook.  I think that's

              going to help really determine the modeling

              approach and help it evolve.

                       You really have to be clear what

              you want to get out and while sometimes you

              want to look out in the future and say

              three years from now we want to make sure

              we're getting such and such I think you've

              got enough near term issues that you need

              to deal with to address very specific near








              term problems.

                       There were some issues.  I mean,

              you asked questions about whether the

              approach is appropriate and I think we all

              concluded that you needed to do some

              analysis and show us how it works so that

              we could give you a credible response in

              the fall because it depends on a lot of

              different factors from exactly the type of

              data you have to be able to give you any

              real good information or evaluation.

                       There were some thoughts about

              simplifying it and thinking about whether

              you could really use statistical analysis

              to simplify some of the approach.  I think

              again that comes back to what you're trying

              to get at, what you're really trying to

              answer.  You can set yourself up for a real

              intense, complicated output that you are

              not going to be able to achieve if you are

              not careful so I think you need to come

              back a little bit.








                       Anything else?  I think it's early

              in the process for us to be able to tell

              you a lot at this point.

                       Nicholas?

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  It's a good

              summary.  The proof is in the pudding.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  It's real

              important.  The short-term energy outlook

              is going to be really important and being

              able to break it down regionally is going

              to be really important and really

              necessary.

                       I think we all agree on that.  You

              need to get something out in January so how

              we are going to be able to help you in the

              fall it's hard to tell because by that time

              you are going to be far enough along that

              it's going to be hard to change direction

              but we'll try to help you tweak it at that

              point.  I think that's about all we can

              say.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Thanks, Mark.  Now we








              have our other Mark B., Mark Burton, to

              summarize the other discussion session.

                       DR. BURTON:  As an academic I'm

              constantly used to doing a lot of work that

              absolutely nobody pays any attention to so

              it frightened me to death today to be in a

              session where what we were looking at was a

              direct EIA response to recommendations or

              complaints that we made last fall.  If I

              had known you guys were really going to

              listen I would have stopped talking a long

              time ago.

                       Essentially the goal has been to

              evaluate two product areas, the annual

              energy outlook and the international energy

              outlook.  EIA came to us in the fall with a

              notion of how they might accomplish that

              and we took exception to that.

                       We saw some strengths in it but we

              also saw some weaknesses that we thought

              required a different approach.  What they

              did in response to our comments was








              initiated an entirely separate effort.

              Instead of looking at a select group of

              surveyed users that had registered for the

              NEMS conference they did an e-mail survey.

              They did three waves.

                       One of the issues that we talked

              about was the response rate.  It turned out

              to be somewhere in the neighborhood of 35

              percent, which I think there was a general

              consensus that it was admirable for this

              type of survey instrument.

                       What we did in the session

              downstairs is just walk through the

              results, talked about the survey method,

              what alternatives there might be, talked

              about the results, where they were useful,

              where they were not.  For example, there

              was some concern that the results while

              they provided a very nice quantitative

              measure of the qualities of these two

              products didn't really provide actionable

              information that could immediately lead to








              alternatives for improvement.

                       We talked about whether there

              might be some problem in the nature of the

              respondees, whether the respondents might

              represent some sort of self-selection, and

              whether they were getting the information

              from the users that they wanted the

              information from.  Again, I think if there

              was a consensus it was basically they were

              getting input from the people that they

              needed to be receiving input from.

                       There was a discussion about

              whether this represented a good group to go

              to on a regular basis.  I think there's

              some fear that if they continue to send

              surveys to conference registrants that

              people wont register for the conference.

              So there was a desire, perhaps, to get at a

              larger set of people so there wouldn't be

              quite as much of a burden in order to do

              this on an ongoing basis.

                       The bottom line, and gee, I'm








              going to do everything I can to get you

              back on schedule, buddy.  I'm doing this

              for you, all right?  The bottom line is

              that this is not perfect.  There's

              information that they would like to get

              that they didn't get from this survey.

              There are still some questions about who

              they are hitting with it as opposed to who

              they want to hit.

                       But I think the bottom line is

              that everybody feels pretty good about

              this.  I mean, it's very rare that you do

              something perfectly the first time.  As a

              first effort I think we are all of one mind

              that this represents very substantive

              progress.

                       So that's it.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Thanks, Mark.  We'll

              move back into breakout sessions now.  The

              committee members will be in the sessions

              they were in last time with one exception,

              which will be that Mark will stay here and








              Nick will go downstairs, Mark Burton.

                       MS. SEREIKA:  I am Susan Sereika.

              I'm from the University of Pittsburgh.

                       MR. WIENIG:  With the ASA

              Committee?

                       MS. SEREIKA:  Yes.

                       MR. BUDZIK:  I'm Phillip Budzik.

              I'm with EIA.

                       MS. NORMAN:  I'm Kara Norman with

              SMG of the EIA.

                       MR. McDOWNEY:  I'm Preston

              McDowney, Statistics and Methods Group,

              EIA.

                       MR. WIENIG:  Dave Costello, our

              speaker for this session is on the phone.

              He'll be just a minute.  This is what you

              get when you do short-term forecasting.

                       MR. COSTELLO:  What's the

              timeline?

                       MR. WIENIG:  In the order of 15 to

              20 minutes.  The next session is on issues

              and short-term energy modeling, adding








              regional components to the EIA short-term

              energy model.

                       You have heard from Dave Costello

              already earlier.  This is part of an

              ongoing interest in EIAs short-term

              modeling.  We expect to be joined by Fred

              Joutz from the George Washington

              University.  He has had a delay but we hope

              that he will be here shortly.

                       In the meantime we weren't really

              asking Dave to do what, three sessions in a

              row.  Thanks for being here.

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Sure.  This is

              totally different from the regional stuff

              in case there's any confusion about that.

              What this has to do with is a question that

              came up repeatedly last summer having to do

              with natural gas, a question and a topic

              that was in the news quite a bit, which was

              since 2000, actually, we have had a couple

              of pretty serious shocks in natural gas

              markets.








                       Actually we had some earlier ones

              in the mid-'90s which at the time probably

              seemed pretty significant but by comparison

              to what's happened since 2000 don't look

              like much.  The question had to do with

              what is this doing to industrial activity

              in the United States.  We know that a lot

              of industries use natural gas extensively

              either for process heat or for feedstock

              and the typical one that people worry

              about, although in terms of total amount of

              natural gas it actually uses is another

              question, but the fertilizer industry was

              hit very hard.  Other industries for which

              natural gas constitutes an important part

              of the variable cost also are of some

              concern.

                       Anyway, Alan Greenspan was asked a

              number of times since he happened to be

              talking a lot about natural gas last

              summer, well, what's this doing to the

              industrial output and his answer was








              generally we haven't seen anything that we

              can point to yet other than some of these

              anecdotal stories about particular

              industries.  Also there has been some

              effort to take the natural gas price shocks

              that we've seen and interpret them in the

              same way that oil price shocks have been

              interpreted in terms of their impact on the

              economy overall.

                       I think Fred has done some work

              along those lines and a couple of other

              people, one an economist from the St. Louis

              Federal Reserve, I think.  Anyway, a number

              of people have done something but it's been

              ad hoc and back of the envelope thing.

                       The motivation for this came from

              two things, one, wanting to be able to

              maybe say something about this question,

              and another thing, being concerned that

              perhaps we are in a regime now where what's

              going on with natural gas in terms of its

              volatility and the levels to which it can








              run when we get into peak demand periods

              may be causing effects on industrial output

              that's not usually captured by our macro

              models.

                       What we usually do in the course

              of monthly forecast is that we take last

              month's forecast and update it as much as

              we can, look at the prices that we are

              generating, and supply those to the

              handlers of the macro model here in EIA and

              ask them to give us a new forecast.

                       We don't always update it every

              month but generally fairly frequently it's

              updated.  So you get some different answers

              but, first of all, that's labor intensive.

              We have to iterate manually to do that.

                       Secondly, I was wondering if maybe

              the result that it gave us back, if we were

              to tell it, for example, that we had a very

              high natural gas price or that we had a

              particular scenario even if we had the time

              to do that particular scenario if they gave








              us back an answer with regard to industrial

              output and the US economic growth in

              general whether it would be sensitive

              enough to maybe incorporate what's going on

              in the gas intensive industries in

              particular.

                       Anyway so the purpose of this was

              to try to see if we could put together a

              little model that tried to take into

              account the interactions between natural

              gas and industrial production and other

              factors and see if we could find a response

              function that was revealing in terms of how

              sensitive it was and whether we could use

              it to either directly do some simulations

              or to go forward and make more models.  So

              I've basically gone over the objective.

              The objective was to see if we could get

              some kind of a useful model out of this

              exercise.

                       Mostly what we wound up doing was

              putting together a VAR model, a couple of








              different ones, and then testing them for

              various specifications to see what made the

              most sense and then look at the impulse

              response functions that those generated to

              see whether it was particularly revealing

              about this question that I've posed.

                       Another thing touched on in the

              paper, there's a paper that details a

              little bit more about this.  I don't know.

              I'm assuming you got a copy of it.  But

              also we started doing some analysis on

              co-integration between some of these

              variables and trying to look at long run

              relationships as another approach.

                       In general we're going to start

              with a general level of consideration of

              what these models will look like and then

              move down to more specific representations

              that seem to make sense.  Ultimately we

              want to try to put these two strategies

              side by side and see what works the best

              and if we get anything that we feel we can








              really use.

                       I'll just go through some of the

              data and then I think after I do that Fred

              will talk about some of the results.  This

              is the industrial natural gas price.  Its

              EIA's industrial natural gas price.  We use

              this although there are some conceptual

              problems with this data although probably

              not serious enough to be of concern in this

              particular work.

                       The red line is the real value in

              1982 dollars.  So clearly there were some

              legals back in '96 and '97 that were of

              note but they pale in comparison by the

              later shocks.

                       This is the net industrial gas

              price, which is the difference between the

              previous 12-month maximum and the current

              price.  Fred may want to talk little bit

              more about it.  It's been used before to

              incorporate memories of shocks into the

              model.








                       This is a measure of industrial

              output.  It's a composite index from the

              six biggest natural gas consumers in the

              manufacturing sector.  The index is

              averaged using value added weights by those

              industries.  All this is national level.

                       Again, the top line is the

              industrial production index not seasonally

              adjusted.  The line below is the pattern of

              natural gas demand by month.  This is

              natural gas demand including combined heat

              and power.

                       So you can see obviously the

              natural gas price shocks, the market shocks

              in general.  It wasn't just natural gas

              prices but there has been a big decline in

              the average level and really in the

              variance of demand for natural gas in the

              industrial sector since 2000.

                       And then I'll let Fred pick up.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  First, I'm sorry I'm

              late.  What I will continue with is a








              discussion of the first of the models that

              we have worked with fairly intensely.

              There's actually a whole suite of these

              models but this summarizes what we have

              done.  I'll present some of the results

              from this in terms of some diagnostics

              about the model and then go through some of

              the testing that we've done in terms of

              looking at simulation exercises and so

              forth.

                       So we start from a framework where

              we utilize the current variables that are

              in the STIFS model that influence the

              industrial sector of natural gas

              consumption and so forth.  We distill this

              down into a four-equation vector on a

              regressive model where on the left-hand

              side we have the price of natural gas.

                       This is in natural logarithms.  We

              have this consumption measure that Dave was

              just showing you.  Then we have this big

              six.  That's that six major industrial








              production sectors, which really drive

              industrial energy consumption and I think

              about 30 percent or 33 percent consumption

              of natural gas.

                       This one that says PGIN, that's

              our net price series.  This is a series

              that we adapted from the oil price

              literature and looking at oil price effects

              where one often thinks that perhaps the

              level and the change may be important but

              what also is critical is perhaps the memory

              of past shocks.

                       So we utilize that concept in

              constructing this variable that we call the

              net price measure.  We also went back and

              tried lags going back three years, that is,

              36 months.  It ended up that 12 lags

              doesn't seem to have much of a difference

              from this.

                       So we have our four variables on

              the left-hand side and then here we have

              lag values of those going back at least 13








              months.  We've tried all variations to

              reduce this.

                       Then we have some deterministic

              variables in here for monthly dummy

              variables.  Then we have some outstanding

              events where there were weather-related

              effects or there were problems in getting

              natural gas supplies to the market.

                       Then we have this other set of

              explanatory variables that we are treating

              as exogenous.  They are actually, I think,

              for the most part really pre-determined and

              these include the spot price of natural

              gas.

                       A very important variable that

              influences the price in the short run looks

              at inventories relative to consumption.  So

              we have this gas VAR variable and we have

              some relative prices of natural gas to

              residual fuel oil.  So we can possibly get

              in ideas of switching in the model.

                       Some of the testing that we did in








              terms of the specifications of our

              alternative models, we looked at

              integration and co-integration.  I won't

              talk about co-integration during this part

              of the session but if there is interest

              later on we can probably fire up the other

              computer and demonstrate some of this.

                       We are concerned about lag length.

              We don't want to have it too short so that

              we miss some of the dynamics of the model

              but we go in the opposite direction a

              little bit with some of our tests.  These

              are some of the standard statistics that we

              use, the Aka Ikie Information Criteria,

              Bayesian-Schwartz, Hannan-Quinn,

              Autocorrelation Coefficients.  We look at

              normality.  We look at Granger causality or

              Granger precedence is probably the better

              way to think about this.

                       We are going to show you impulse

              responses.  We have done some work in

              variance decomposition and then the








              simulation, which is the thing that is,

              perhaps, I think, really interesting about

              what we've managed to get done so far, and

              where we want to go with co-integration is

              thinking about this in terms of error

              correction modeling and other forecasts.

                       We started off with that vector

              auto-regressive model and that's what we

              are going to think of as being our GUM.

              That's our general unrestricted model.  So

              we try to put everything in at the

              beginning and then we have our statistical

              evaluation that allows us to try to distill

              that down to the most parsimonious model

              that's possible rather than start with a

              specific model and then veer off in

              different directions trying to find an

              appropriate model.  We start at the outset

              with a very large one and then bring it

              down.

                       One is just to have no seasonal

              dummy variables, no event dummies, no








              exogenous variables.  So its just a strict

              VAR model to Model 5, which includes the

              seasonal variables, the event dummies, and

              the exogenous variables, and model 4 has no

              event dummies and so forth.

                       Here are some of the results from

              this and here I'm presenting F-tests of

              these sets of restrictions.  The results

              using the other criteria essentially give

              us the result.  So what we have here is we

              have Model 5.  This is the most general

              model  against Model 4, Model 5 against 3,

              5 against 2, and then 4 against 3, 4

              against 2, and so on and so forth.

                       What we find is that Model 4,

              which doesn't include those particular

              event dummies, does not reduce the

              explanatory power of the general model if

              we impose those zero restrictions; however,

              any of the other restrictions against Model

              5 lead to rejection.

                       If we go down to Model 4 we see








              that any of the other restrictions are a

              restriction on Model 4.  You see down here

              at 3 there doesn't appear to be much

              difference in explanatory power between

              models 3 and 2; however, the net result is

              that our procedure suggests that Model 4 is

              the appropriate model.

                       Here are some of these Granger

              precedents tests.  I don't want to harp on

              these too much but they give us a clue as

              to some of the results that we may see

              later on.  So the way that we did this is

              we started off with our Model 4 and for

              each equation we asked the question whether

              we can remove lag values of the other

              variables in the system and see if this

              leads to a loss in explanatory power.  If

              it does then it suggests that that

              particular variable in its lag value helps

              to explain the current value of our

              dependent variable.

                       So in this case we have our








              industrial natural gas price and we are

              presenting the P-values associated with our

              tests.  This is our net price series and

              the P-value here is greater than 10

              percent.  So it suggests that this shock

              series isn't going to help us to explain

              much about the level itself over the full

              sample.

                       However, we do see that

              consumption and industrial production do

              help to explain future movements in

              industrial gas prices.  The net price

              variable, I don't know why this result came

              up.  This is one of those bizarre things

              that happen.

                       It appears for industrial

              consumption that none of the variables

              helps to explain future values of it;

              however, if we do a joint test of all three

              of the variables the level of the price,

              the net price measure, and industrial

              production, we do find that they as a group








              help to explain.  Further discussion on

              that.

                       Here for industrial production

              what I want to emphasize here, and I don't

              want to try to sell it too much, is that it

              does appear as though the net price, this

              past shock, memories of past natural gas

              price shocks, does seem to have a marginal

              impact on industrial production.

                       Now, here I'm focusing on only

              four of the impulse responses from our

              model.  What in effect we are doing with

              these impulse responses is we are asking

              the question if there is a shock this month

              to a particular variable, let's say the

              price level, how does that effect trace

              itself out on the future values of our

              variables of interest?  What we are doing

              here is we are taking the cumulative effect

              of the shocks.  We're not looking at the

              marginal effects at Month 7 or anything

              like that.  We are looking at the








              cumulative effects.

                       What I've done here, and I can

              show you more if there's time, is to focus

              on the industrial consumption and the

              industrial production measures because

              that's the thing that Dave in STIFS is

              trying to get at with this particular

              experimental study.  What we find here is

              that the memories of big natural gas price

              shocks don't seem to influence consumption.

              What I'm showing here, the blue line is

              that impulse response and the red line

              represents a confidence interval around

              that; however, what we do see is that the

              impact of a positive shock to the price

              does have a negative effect on future

              consumption.  So that's consistent with at

              least some economic theory.

                       Now, down here I'm looking at the

              impacts of price level shocks and this past

              memory shock on industrial production.  The

              evidence is not overwhelming but it








              certainly suggests that the memory of past

              big natural gas prices has an impact on

              industrial production.

                       Similarly, for the price level we

              are seeing this negative impact.  So we do

              seem to find some relationship between

              industrial natural gas prices in various

              forms, consumption of natural gas by the

              industrial sector, and industrial sector

              activity as a whole.

                       Now, here we just did some fairly

              simple forecast simulations.  We've done

              others but I just want to try to give you

              the essence of it here.  We're trying to

              see how well does our model fit or track

              the turbulent period that Dave showed you

              starting really in 2000 when the price of

              industrial natural gas went up to I think

              it was $8.70 per TCF.  I think it was in

              January or so.

                       We are going to start our

              simulation before then.  We are going to








              fit the model from 1989 up through December

              of '97 and then were going to have the

              model try to fit the rest of the period.

              The model is going to be dynamic for the

              endogenous variables.  We are just going to

              use the actually values for the

              predetermined and exogenous variables.

                       So this is going to buy us our

              result somewhat.  Well, it certainly will

              buy us our results but I think it still

              gives us the essence of the story that we

              are trying to understand and in particular

              I want to mention about these variables we

              have this storage level to consumption, an

              important measure in terms of short-run

              dynamics.  We have also lag spot prices in

              here.

                       Here is where we fit this model.

              I don't know how clear this to you.  The

              green line shows us the actual movement of

              industrial natural gas prices and our other

              variables and the blue line shows us our








              forecasted values.

                       When we first did this I don't

              know who fell out of their chair first,

              Dave or myself.  We saw it seemed to track

              the natural gas prices up here in the

              northwest quadrant.  We were amazed.  Now,

              we think that's primarily being driven by a

              lot of the predetermined variables keeping

              us so close.

                       Over here we have natural gas

              consumption.  One of the nice things, at

              least, that I would like to point out here

              is that we had natural gas consumption up

              in this range and then it seems to be

              tracking the decline.  So that was a good

              feeling.

                       For industrial production we see a

              slowdown but not as great as was actually

              observed.  It maxes out at about 5-6

              percent above what was actually observed in

              some months.  In others it's only about one

              or two percent.  I really wouldn't want to








              talk much about this graph.

                       Here's where we use the fitted

              values through the full sample.  So here we

              are giving ourselves the best possible

              world to deal with.

                       Now I'm going to show you what

              happens when we only fit the model through

              December 1997.  The results look worse but

              they continue to give you, I think, this

              consistent story about natural gas

              consumption and industrial activity in the

              wake of price shocks and so forth.  How

              clear is this?  Do you have pictures where

              you can see some of this?

                       Up here I have the industrial

              production index.  The blue line shows us

              what our forecast is.  The green line shows

              us what the actual level is.  The dashed

              red line represents the two-standard error

              confidence interval around that.

                       What we see is that the model

              seems to be predicting that industrial








              production is going to continue to rise.

              Now, this is fit through December of '97.

              The decline in industrial activity we know

              was not all due to increases in natural gas

              prices.  There were a few other events that

              seemed to occur that affected industrial

              production.

                       However, it seems like it's okay

              and we stay within the bound up until the

              big industrial natural gas price shock and

              then we begin to lose it.  Over here this

              is the simulation for the industrial

              natural gas price and here is that spike in

              December 2001.

                       The model does well over those

              first two and a half years and after that

              it tries to bring the price back down but

              it doesn't go quite down as far as it did

              and then we had the second set of price

              shocks in 2003.  So we are going to have a

              rough time there.

                       Heres the other interesting part.








              Here's the industrial consumption.  In this

              one what happens is the blue line is

              showing us what the simulated value is and

              the green line shows what the actual value

              is.  We stay within that confidence

              interval certainly through 2000 and into

              2001 but after about 2001 and 2002 and 2003

              we're outside.  We are below,

              under-predicting actually consumption.

                       I think I can relate that to one

              thing in particular and that is this part

              here where the natural gas price is being

              over-predicted.  If you recall from the

              impulse responses we saw that it's the

              level of the prices that seemed to have a

              big impact on industrial natural gas

              consumption.

                       So in summary what we have done is

              we have just presented here some tests of

              an experimental model on this interaction

              between natural gas prices, natural gas

              consumption in the industrial sector, and








              economic activity.  We have done this in a

              VAR framework.  We have tried to use this

              net price or memory effect that seems to

              give us some oomph to the model much like

              it does in some of the oil price models.

                       The impulse response function

              suggests natural gas price shocks have

              negative impacts on the industrial sector.

              We have done the simulation exercises

              suggesting the VAR model can reasonably

              approximate the data-generating process.

              I'm not going to define "reasonable"

              because I don't know what that is at this

              point.  We have done a lot more work and,

              again, if there's time we can show it to

              interested panel members.

                       We have a set of questions for the

              committee and certainly chime in with your

              own.  First off, do you think the VAR

              approach makes sense?  Are there other

              variables that we should have included that

              you think we forgot?  What do you think the








              strengths and the weaknesses of the

              approach are?  How can we modify it?

                       To the extent that you think this

              approach has its merit are there other

              sectors where you would like to see this

              done?  Do you have other ideas for this net

              price measure?

                       There are variations on this that

              people have tried and we've done this one.

              What do you think about using these

              constructed variables for the Big-6 in the

              industrial sector?  When we constructed

              this Big-6 measure we took the industrial

              price measures from the Federal Reserve

              Board and they publish tables of value

              added in 2000.  So we used a constant

              weight in constructing our industrial price

              Big-6 measure based on those value added

              weights.  Another way it might be done is

              using the industrial surveys from 1998 and

              using some kind of a consumption measure

              weighted approach.








                       I think I'll stop here.  If there

              are any questions I'd appreciate hearing

              from you.

                       MS. SEREIKA:  I'm going to take a

              cue from Mark Bernstein from the last

              session to be able to do this more

              effectively.  You have a lot of questions.

              To be able to give you a good answer

              there's one basic piece of information as

              panelists which is you picked a particular

              approach, the VAR approach.  You talked

              about at least a couple of others.  You

              mentioned a few others in the beginning.

                       Our basic question is why did you

              as the author of the paper think that VAR

              was the best approach?  That will be our

              platform to answer the question.  The same

              thing goes to a lot of  for example,

              the net price variables.  What are the

              other kinds of net price variables being

              considered in the  and why did you

              choose this particular one.








                       I think if we could get some

              answers to that we could probably give you

              a better reaction.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Let me start with the

              VAR idea here.  I think there are perhaps

              two main reasons why this seemed attractive

              to us.  There could be others but, first

              off, what we are trying to do is look at

              the possible simultaneous relationship

              between the variables of interest.

                       By simultaneous I don't just mean

              contemporaneous.  I'm also talking about

              the interaction and the dynamics of the

              variables.  So in that respect I think that

              begins to get at the difficulty that Davis

              faced with the STIFS and then having to go

              to essentially another room or another

              model where they run a macro model and then

              they walk back and give him a number and

              say okay, can you try this and how many

              times can you do this sort of iteration

              whereas here we are trying to actually do








              it all at the same time.  So that gets us

              into the dynamics of it in a crude form.

                       Another way to look at this that

              has appeal for other frameworks is that

              here we are really going at I don't want to

              necessarily call it truly atheoretical but

              there's not a whole lot of theory or

              structure in the model.

                       It turns out that we actually can

              reduce this VAR down some more.  We can

              boil it down some more and look at the idea

              of co-integration, which suggests that

              there is a long-run relationship between

              the variables, and in fact we do find

              evidence of this and we can look at the

              interaction between the short run and the

              long run simultaneously.

                       This would be a way further up the

              pike about bridging the gap between the

              STIFS and the NIMS models.  Let's see.  Is

              there another reason why we wanted to use

              the VAR?  I think it's primarily to give








              Dave a tool so that he can work not only

              with the STIFS but also with real economic

              activity in the model.

                       The second question dealt with the

              choice of our net price measure.  This is

              the first time that I had seen someone use

              a net price measure for natural gas.  There

              may be others but I'm not aware of them.

              In the oil price literature where this has

              been tried initially was well, you can

              always pick one person and someone will say

              well, there was also somebody in 1970 that

              did something like this.  It's primarily

              driven by recent work by Hamilton in which

              he used these net oil price measures and he

              tried various lags going back how far you

              would want to go.  Other people have just

              said okay, what's the difference between

              the maximum we have ever experienced and

              the price today whereas in this case we are

              saying well, we forget things after a

              certain point in time.  You can argue and








              debate about that or maybe you want to

              discount those longer run values here.  We

              just say at Point X depreciation zero.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I'm curious.  Have

              you tried the other measures?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Yes, we actually went

              back 36 months and it doesn't seem to have

              much effect.  I mean, I was surprised

              because when I looked at the 12-month ones

              I think we plotted that out in the slides

              here.  It looks really like its almost a

              seasonal variable right here.  It's not

              quite seasonal.  The green line is the one

              that we actually use.  That's our maximum

              values.  Excuse me.  The net is the one

              that we use.  The green line is our maximum

              value.

                       So in a period like this we are

              right at whatever the previous maximum

              value was and then we are going to newer

              heights.  This looks fairly seasonal when I

              first saw it and so I said well, lets go








              back 36 months.  It smooths this out some

              but not by much.

                       Another measure that's been used

              for net oil prices is often done not just

              looking at the first moment of the

              distribution but the second moment.  So one

              would think about this in terms of a

              measure of variance or conditional variance

              that fluctuates over time.

                       So in periods where there's a

              tremendous amount of uncertainty you could

              have prices be fairly stable but then you

              get a small shock but it's small enough to

              get people worried about what's going to

              happen and people have tried that measure.

                       Alternatively you could have

              periods of very high prices and you could

              have the same size shock but people say who

              cares.  So that's one other measure that's

              been used.  People have also tried some

              asymmetry sorts of tests looking at

              deviations from a maximum, deviations from








              the floor, and so forth.  I didn't do the

              floor in this case.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  One specific

              question, is net price variable?  It seems

              to me if you take the max of one year or

              two year and cut in price and if you say

              every once in a while there's going to be a

              maximum it's going to have the effect of an

              intervention type of thing.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  You could think of it

              like that.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  When you are

              modeling you already had an intervention

              theme so I'm wondering if that might

              explain why the intervention is not

              significant but  and I'm wondering if

              it could be interpreted that way.

                       The other thing I wondered is I'm

              curious if you go back to I don't have the

              slide in my hand-out here, the slide about

              comparing actual versus predicted.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Which of the








              simulations?

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  The next one.  I'm

              looking at this with my bare eyes and I'm

              saying that you are not doing that well.

              But on the other hand you concluded and

              your conclusions seemed to indicate you

              felt you were doing pretty well and I was

              just wondering am I missing something

              there.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  No, I'm not trying to

              oversell it but I don't want to undersell

              it at the same time.  The reason that I

              think it's important to show here is that

              really up until, say, 1999 the gas price

              market, and Dave can talk certainly more on

              this than I can, had been fairly stable

              through the '90s.  There were a few bumps

              along the way but it had been fairly

              stable.

                       Then the structure of the market

              seemed to change.  Then we had these huge

              shocks.  We had prices in the $2 range per








              TCF and then suddenly they are up at 4 and

              5 and then 8 and then back down to 3 and 4

              and 5 and back up to 6 and 7.  So any

              linear model is going to have an impossible

              time trying to capture that.  What made me

              feel reasonably decent about the outcome

              from this set of graphs was that the

              directions of change in the variables were

              consistent with what we might call economic

              theory, that if we fit the model through a

              certain period where we have a set of

              economic fundamentals that are working in

              this market and then we subject this market

              to some really huge shocks.  I mean, I

              should have brought in a plot of the real

              price of natural gas.  Those that we saw in

              2000 and 2003 are unprecedented.

                       So in that respect I think that

              the directions of change that we saw here

              particularly in the consumption measure and

              to a certain extent here in this price

              measure don't necessarily start in 2001








              right when we think they should.  Before

              then it does reasonably well.  Then again,

              its the direction of change that seems to

              work.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  So your model

              reflects the theory well but the actual

              prices are different?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Right, because,

              remember, there was no experience in this

              post-2000 period.  This is the problem that

              the STIFS model and Dave and his associates

              have been facing, how do we deal with this

              kind of an issue.

                       They are asking questions.  Are

              there these relationships between the real

              sector and the energy sector and how can we

              begin to try to understand these?

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  So the first

              question then is is an answer like this

              acceptable?  I think maybe you should try

              to do something that will get the green

              line back into your  maybe that's --








                       MR. JOUTZ:  This is through

              December 1997.  Really, for the next two to

              almost three years the model is able to

              capture the movement in the series.  But

              once you get these  the price measure

              is going up in the order of four.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But the real

              question is if one believes the future is

              going to look more like it has over the

              past couple of years then what the model

              shows from '97 to 2000 is irrelevant.  I

              mean, if the future is going to look more

              like the recent past then you need to do

              something to capture that.  That's the real

              issue.  If it returns back to the way it

              was before and this is just a short-term

              blip, fine.  Everything will work out

              nicely.

                       DR. BURTON:  I agree with you

              completely.  I think in part it depends on

              whether users learn how to anticipate and

              deal with this much more volatile set of








              market conditions.

                       MS. KHANNA:  Well, actually as an

              economist I take a slightly different 

              I mean, look at the data.  I buy your

              point, actually, very well because if you

              look at the data through 97 you've never

              seen anything like what you see right here.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I don't disagree

              with that at all.

                       MS. KHANNA:  So I don't think it's

              possible for any model to actually get a

              very good forecast for  2000 onward.  I

              think the real test of the model is going

              to be from now through the next couple of

              years.  If we see that kind of volatility

               next couple of years will this model

              then be able to capture it because then

              we'll have the memory of the volatility at

              all and then we'll be able to capture

              because in memory there is no real

              volatility at all.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  One of the things








              you really need to do is put in the data

              for 2003 and then go out and pretend you

              know the future and 

                       MS. KHANNA:  Yes, that, I think,

              would be a really good 

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I mean, from this

              point we are not here to tell you whether

              this thing is going to perform well.  That

              wasn't what I was actually going to ask

               one of the things missing in the paper

              you gave us are the references.  I would

              appreciate  I actually read the paper

              but I was really looking for the

              references.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  That's my omission.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  It had seemed to

              me that you had learned from some of the

              oil price literature.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Yes.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  If you think about

              it one of the things that might impact

              decision making and  futures prices








               I know that's hard to try to capture

              but I wonder if you thought about it in the

              literature 

                       MR. JOUTZ:  I'm going to push that

              one back on Dave.  I think I've asked him

              about futures prices in the past.  My

              recollection is they are not necessarily

              the greatest things in the world, either,

              although as an economist I would think that

              they should work reasonable well.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Well, I think the

              Big-6 energy intensity industries --

                       MR. JOUTZ:  They are hedging, you

              bet.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  They don't just

              rely on spot prices for natural gas.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  That's right.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Particularly the

              changes over the past few years may be due

              to their expectations of where the price is

              going  also the relationship between

              where they think the price will be and then








              as you get there the difference between

               futures price is actually 

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Another important

              point here that Dave has mentioned in talks

              with him is that you are also getting

              substitution away from natural gas during

              these really high-priced periods to the

              extent that where the firms or the

              factories can switch fuels they are going

              to do so.  I think both of you had a

              comment about where do we go from here with

              the model or models that were experimenting

              with.  One of the things that I would say

              is that in testing the model itself through

              the full sample period and through

              recursive estimation procedures where I

              could stop in 1994 and fit the model

              through the full sample, add a month,

              re-estimate the model, and then refit it

              through all the way through.

                       If I do that kind of an exercise

              what is very clear and which has surprised








              me is that for industrial consumption and

              industrial output this particular model is

              stable.  If you want to think about this in

              terms of recursive Chow tests where you are

              doing a whole sequence of these tests off

              into the future the models are stable.

                       The problem is the natural gas

              price.  I mean, if you are going along and

              you have again this notion of $2 to $3 per

              TCF price and then all of a sudden it goes

              up to 8 no model is going to capture that.

              The question is how can you modify the

              model now that it has been observed as you

              have suggested.  That's the next stage of

              trying to work with these models.

                       Again, this is limiting in some

              respects but it's suggesting that Dave at

              least has an experimental tool that shows

              him this interaction between natural gas

              prices and real activity.  It seems like

              it's very little but I was surprised we got

              as far as we did with it.








                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  No, and I think

              the approach is actually quite interesting.

              You have some interesting stuff.  The

              question is just how do you use it now and

              for the future is the question.  The other

              question you asked is whether it's

              appropriate to look at the Big-6.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Yes.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I haven't looked

              at the data recently.  What's the gap

              between the top six and everybody else?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  They have a little

              over 80 percent of total natural gas

              consumption in the industrial sector.

                       DR. BURTON:  I'm a little confused

              over what the Big-6 index is intended to

              reflect.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Let me see if I can

              find it.  I think I put on here somewhere

              who they are.

                       DR. BURTON:  I know which

              industries but, I mean, what is this index








              intended to capture?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  The idea here is that

              we have six industrial sectors which are

              the most natural gas-intensive consumers.

              So they are going to be focused most on

              movements in price whether they are using

              this as a feedstock or whether they are

              using it to provide heat, what have you, or

              some kind of power.

                       They are going to respond the

              most.  If we were to put in other

              industries that lets say their natural gas

              consumption was zero and we had their

              activity fluctuating it could be

              fluctuating and it could be correlated with

              natural gas prices but it would just be a

              spurious relationship.

                       DR. BURTON:  Right, so this index

              is the principal output measure?  Is that

              it?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Its the Federal

              Reserve Board's industrial production








              index.

                       DR. BURTON:  But you're using it

              as an aggregated measure of output?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  That's right.

                       DR. BURTON:  And when you

              aggregate it you have to measure output as

              measured in dollars, right?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Well, I was the one

              who selected doing this in terms of value

              added.

                       DR. BURTON:  What I'm curious

              about and I know there are texts that

              address it and I read it and it was still

              unclear.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Its not complete.

                       DR. BURTON:  That makes me feel

              better.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  There were lots of

              spreadsheets involved in that part of it.

                       DR. BURTON:  When you construct an

              output measure that's based on a monetary

              aggregation and you observe a change in








              movement in that output measure, say a

              increase, how can you know that that

              increase is an actual increase in physical

              outputs or a decrease in physical outputs

              versus simply a reflection of the change in

              input price that's working through the

              final product price?  Do you see?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Let me try to think

              about this.

                       DR. BURTON:  That's a hard

              question even to ask.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  No, no, I mean,

              aggregation issues are always really

              thorny.  I want to try to be careful with

              what I say.  The dollar measure that we

              used is only for 2000 and it's a value

              added measure.

                       This is what the Federal Reserve

              Board used and we hear that constant weight

              over the full sample.

                       DR. BURTON:  That makes it so that

              you are not going to have input-related








              price fluctuations in this measure?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  No, right, but there's

              another really good point here that I don't

              think I made clear in the write-up is that

              some of the industrial production measures

              that the Federal Reserve is able to produce

              actually are constructed from energy

              consumption itself whereas it turned out

              fortunately for these six industries that

              we have put out here the output actually is

              a physical quantity.  I think in one case

              it might be 8 percent of it is the number

              of hours employed.

                       DR. BURTON:  And you're

              multiplying by the value added in order to

              perform the aggregation?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  That's correct.

                       DR. BURTON:  All right, I'm good

              to go.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Since we cannot

              really see the future I was wondering

              whether we can introduce an artificial








              shock early in your series and apply your

              model to see how that tracked because I

              think your first goal I thought was to

              really figure out how long does the effect

              of the shock can last, for example.  It

              seems to me that if you really want to

              answer it one way is to apply your model

              with an artificial shock right in the

              beginning of the series or time reverse it

              because VAR is essentially a stationary

              animal so it works because you have a shock

              right at the end of the period and see it

              coming  for example, and I was

              wondering if that could be of any use.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  If we had seen that I

              wouldn't be here today.  That's really

              clear.  I'm not quite sure how to implement

              just introducing a shock in the middle of

              the sample.  I don't know quite how to do

              that from a statistical framework.

                       I do think we get partially at the

              question you have by looking at the impulse








              responses from the implied VAR model

              because that's saying if there is a shock

              to the price level at time T you can then

              generate what the impact of that shock

              would be on future values of the level at T

              plus H or industrial production at T plus H

              and so on and so forth.  What we did with

              the impulse response was we accumulated

              them because we wanted to see how the path

              of the series worked, not just those

              individual components.

                       Sometimes these impulse responses

              are just completely opaque and here they

              seem to be somewhat consistent with our

              results.  I only showed you the 4 by 4 out

              of the 12 possible diagrams.  There were

              some other consistent impulse responses

              there, in particular like if you see shocks

              to industrial production do you see future

              increases in industrial consumption.  So it

              grows on a steady path in that respect.

                       I think there was some limited








              effect of a shock to industrial production

              having a short run impact on natural gas

              price levels.  I wouldn't want to think

              that that would have a permanent effect but

              it wouldn't surprise me necessarily that if

              there was a fairly large increase in

              industrial production it could have an

              impact for a month or two or even three on

              the price level.  This is just one sector

              of natural gas consumption.

                       MS. KHANNA:  The way I feel, I

              just think that Mark had the same comment

              which is about testing your model and you

              said about the model after 2003 you said

              introduce an artificial shock and then see

              how the model performs.  Intuitively that's

              a very appealing suggestion to me.  Would

              it be possible for you to generate

              artificially  variation and then

              introduce that kind of giant shock?  It

              lets me move the window back  just to

              see the predictive power of your model








              because if you are going to use this model

              to see what's going to happen in the future

              and if you do expect these higher

              volatilities  having a model that 

              well when the market is stable is not going

              to be very useful.

                       You really want to actually

              subject your model to all kinds of maybe

              even bizarre looking pricing just to see

              how it really behaves.  If you find you get

              reasonable results even when you have

              artificial price shocks or things that you

              haven't  that would be your starting

              point and that would be the real test of

              your model.

                       Otherwise, looking at a stable

              market, if that's not what you expect you

              could have a lot of models if you do that

               I'm saying you see the supply  if

              you take that supply and just move it back

              to '86 artificially in your date and then

              let the price  and maybe have another








              spike and if the model is actually able

               you don't know what the industrial

              output is going to be because  simulate

              something like that to see if your model

              would be able to capture that.  It would be

              an artificial exercise but I think 

                       MR. JOUTZ:  So I would just put a

              shock in there and then just see what

              happens to the model.  My first thought

              would be I would get the exact same

              diagrams.  The extra problem would be that

              my confidence intervals would blow up

              because the information that I had been

              able to get in estimating up to that point

              where the shock occurred would not be as

              much as I've had previously.  So I have a

              feeling that the model is going to do

              pretty much the same thing given that the

              model for consumption and industrial

              production is fairly stable.

                       Let me try offering another kind

              of suggestion here.  If we believe that








              let's say '99 and 2000 and beyond is this

              new regime for natural gas there are

              perhaps two things that strike us.  The

              first is the level shift component.  That's

              one thing that I think we can try to do

              with these models fairly easily is

              incorporate a level shift impact for

              natural gas prices for that period and see

              how well it's able to do the prediction.

                       The second component comes to this

              relative volatility measure and here the

              VAR as it's currently specified isn't going

              to capture that.  What would begin to

              capture it is perhaps looking at one of

              these models where we think about

              conditional volatility.

                       You can do it from a stochastic

              framework and an estimation through a GARCH

              procedure or you could do this through some

              sort of ad hoc approach where I'm going to

              just say some standard deviation of the

              past 12 months or 24 months or last 3








              months, some weighted average of that.

              Then you go to the question of how well are

              we able to predict in this much more

              volatile period.  I would feel a little bit

              more comfortable perhaps trying something

              like that rather than go back in '94 or '96

              and put in the shock.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  I just wanted to

              comment on that.  Earlier on you were

              discussing why VAR.  I think the way you

              can write it down like an equation and

              explain it is one of the attractive

              features of VAR is that you can explain to

              people, okay, what relates to what from

               and so on.  I think if you get more

              complicated with GARCH and stuff like that

              you are going to lose the transparency of

              some of these things.

                       I somehow find interesting the

              shock and studying it.  That way you can

              actually say something about how long the

              shock last.  I think that's the key quest.








              I think especially if it's happening only

              once in a while should we just throw away

              all the data before the shock.  That's for

              your future forecasting purposes or how

              much does it affect.  Those are the real

              questions, I think.  I think that would be

              interesting to see 

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Could I ask you for

              references in terms of introducing these

              artificial shocks earlier in the sample?

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Sure.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  To see how people have

              actually tried to implement that?

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Like a simulation

              expansion, sure, I can --

                       MR. JOUTZ:  I'd like to know what

              my benchmark would be in terms of

              evaluating the performance of the model and

              so forth in that kind of an environment.

              One of the things that are difficult, I

              think, in an exercise like this is that in

              some ways we would like to be able to








              explain all of these events with our model.

                       We're lucky because we have the

              full information.  When it comes to Dave

              the last week of every month he's got to

              say okay, I know what's going to happen in

              the last three months of 2005 and that's

              going to have this impact on prices and

              consumption.

                       So I came in with limited

              expectations in trying to think about how

              can we have this model that gives us a

              little bit more in terms of the projection

              system but also gives us the link to the

              macro economy that he felt was missing in

              his current set of tools.

                       He gets these numbers and then he

              says does this make sense and he discusses

              with his staff does this make sense and so

              forth.  So then they are going to bring in

              their add factors where their expertise

              contributes to the model.  So we would like

              the empirical part to actually capture as








              much as of this and then give us the

              direction and then he's going to fine-tune

              it from there.

                       Dave, do you want to add to this?

                       MR. COSTELLO:  Just that I think

              for a couple of reasons it's worth going a

              little further with it because the benefit

              that it gives us is a method for, say, if

              we want to do a lot of different scenarios

              or some stochastic simulations that

              essentially explore possibilities that are

              sometimes extreme ranges but not have to do

              that and be pretty much unrealistic about

              some of the underlying variables like

              industrial output.

                       This was a test because gas was so

              interesting to do it with respect to that

              particular angle but it has a broader

              importance for us.  So that time if we do

              stochastic runs as a regular sort of thing,

              which is what we want to do, we can have

              incorporated in it this feedback component








              from the macro that helps make it complete.

              As it is, if we did a stochastic run

              essentially it would fix the macro inputs

              which doesn't make sense.  They have to be

              made stochastic somehow and this seemed to

              be the most sensible try.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I just wanted to

              add that you can't deal with in this kind

              of stuff and fundamentally you are going to

              have to try to answer as we report in time

              how this change in natural gas prices is

              going to change decision making among the

              gas users.  You can't answer that in these

              types of models but it may be something

              that you try to get an understanding of how

              companies are going to change the way they

              are going to make decisions, particularly

              the Big-6 guys.  That may then help figure

              out how you have to incorporate that.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Yes, and the model

              does give us those directions.  We see the

              response to those price increases.  We see








              natural gas consumption by that sector

              fall.  The current STIFS doesn't actually

              enable you to see that.  So in that sense I

              think that's one reason why Dave wanted to

              try to see what the model would buy him.

                       MS. KHANNA:  Anything else?

                       MS. NORMAN:  In regard to the

              possible simulation and the continuous

              updating for estimating and comparing

              against the actual data that you have how

              far out are you trying to estimate or did I

              just miss it somewhere in the context?

                       MR. JOUTZ:  The horizon that Dave

              was concerned with was typically 24 months,

              a maximum, I think, of 24 months.

                       MS. NORMAN:  I was just thinking

              about what you were talking about earlier

              where if you were to update it and do a

              month by month snapshot and then do a

              comparison to see how well it can project

              out, at least just for a year, nothing

              extremely further than that.








                       MR. JOUTZ:  In the slides that we

              presented here let,s try to show you some

              possible extremes and see how it goes from

              there.

                       MS. NORMAN:  Just curious.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  That's certainly what

              we want to do.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Thanks.

                       MR. JOUTZ:  Thank you.

                       MR. BREIDT:  So let's finish off

              the last bit of the morning here.  We'll

              have two ASA discussants summarize the

              discussions in the two breakout session.

              Before we do that I want to introduce Susan

              Sereika, who is the new committee member

              who arrived mid-morning.  I forgot to do

              that earlier.  I apologize.

                       First we'll have Neha report on

              natural gas prices and industrial sector

              responses.

                       MS. KHANNA:  Thank you.  We had a

              very, very lively debate in our breakout








              session, I should say, one of the best I

              think I've seen in the couple of years that

              I have been around.  The main question that

              the committee addressed was the particular

              model chosen for this paper the right one.

                       The discussion took the form of,

              well, the model performs really well in the

              first few years of the historical series

              because it was a particularly stable time

              and there were no major structural changes

              in the series and so the model does a

              remarkably good job of predicting that.

                       The problem arose when the nature

              of the series itself seems to have changed.

              We have gotten not a new level of prices

              but increased volatility in those prices.

              What the committee members picked up on was

              the actual series started to fall outside

              of even the confidence bands and there was

              some concern about that.  So the earlier

              discussion centered around what do you do

              about that and is the model sufficient for








              this.

                       I think the primary suggestion

              that came out was to try and either fit the

              model maybe not from 1997 and then predict

              but maybe from 2003 so you start seeing

              some of that volatility right in your

              sample period when you are doing out of

              your sub-sample forecasts or is it to try

              to subject the series to some kind of

              artificial shock.  There was some debate

              about how that could actually be done.

                       But I think the primary thing that

              the committee was saying was if you are

              going into a new natural gas regime then we

              need to test the model under the new regime

              conditions to see if it really has the kind

              of predictive power that we want.

                       The good news was that the model

              did give the right direction of change and

              that's typically your first measure of are

              we on the right track.  It looks like the

              model is capturing that but I think that








              the committee would like to see some more

              tests of the model to the kind of regime

              that we are moving into.

                       I think that was the biggest

              recommendation that came out.  There were

              other smaller recommendations like some

              question about exchange of references.

              Both sides wanted some more references.

              Possibly using historical futures prices in

              the market to see if that had any kind of

              explanatory power.

                       There was some question about the

              right net price variable and the authors

              gave us a good response to why they picked

              the particular one that they chose but it

              may be nice to see how other ones perform

              if there's really any difference or not.

                       I think that was the primary

              recommendation that came out.  If anyone

              else who was there from the committee wants

              to add to this I would like your help.

                       Then I think that's all that we








              have to say.  Thank you.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Next Moshe will

              summarize the results of the other

              breakout.

                       MR. FEDER:  I'm supposed to talk

              here about problems of coverage of the

              frame so I must say that my summary is

              going to be a coverage problem, too.  I'll

              cover what I've been able to take from

              that.

                       The question was regarding the

              defects in frames and the coverage that are

              used by the EIA and how can you measure it.

              There are two main ways to do it.  One way

              is to compare it to census frames, which

              are usually much more comprehensive, and

              the other is to look at some tabulated data

              such as the one I'm holding here when you

              compare consumption with disposition and

              you see a discrepancy which is accounted

              for by a balancing item.

                       There was some discussion about








              why there could be a discrepancy and that

              could be for a variety of reasons,

              different definitions and so on.  Frame

              defects is only one of them.

                       With regards to matching to the

              census it was mentioned that the EIA has a

              threshold of one megawatts conception below

              which a plant is not included in the frame.

              There are linkage issues.  There are

              certain limitations because of disclosure

              issues that don't allow matching.  There

              are different definitions of establishments

              between the two organizations mainly

              because of the level of aggregation in

              state level data.

                       There was another important point

              raised by one of the committee members.

              There could be some establishments missing

              for both, in which case you will never

              know.  Then we talked about the issue of

              how to compute the rate of the coverage.

                       There it really depends on what is








              your measure of coverage.  Is it by volume

              or is it by the number of missing

              establishments because there could be some

              missing establishments that are also very

              small and the contribution to the national

              aggregate is not that high.  But on the

              other hand there could be some interest

              because of policy issues in small

              establishments.  So we really need to

              define the coverage issue.

                       Some remedies to that were

              suggested.  A committee member suggested an

              adaptive sampling approach which was

              proposed in two ways.  One way to do this

              was by asking known establishments, plants

              and so on, who your competitors are.

                       Tell us who else is out there in

              the market and try to see if we actually

              have the information.  Another idea

              proposed by this committee member was to

              ask them about the suppliers and the

              customers and see if those are missing.  So








              this what we referred to as both adaptive

              sampling and network sampling is to

              identify missing units not only by census

              by also by those that we know about.

                       Then there was another question

              raised.  What discrepancy we see in the

              tabulated data such as here, what is large

              and what is not large?  How do you measure

              it?  In addition a question that was raised

              from the audience is why do you really care

              about bias?  Maybe bias is not so bad if

              it's constant over time because we are more

              interested in trend and seeing changes in

              the trend.

                       That led to a suggestion that one

              should look not only at the size of the

              balancing item but trends in that because

              if it fluctuates sometime its positive,

              sometimes its negative.  Maybe it's just

              because the attribution to a given year is

              not the same across the different reporting

              levels and definitions.








                       Finally there was a suggestion

              made by another committee member to create

              the EIA frame as a sample from the bigger

              population because we know some people are

              not there and treat it as a nonresponse

              problem and calculate propensity scores for

              units being in the frame based on some

              census data by post-certification of the

              sample and using some known techniques for

              the response.

                       MR. BREIDT:  I now need to invite

              public questions and comments.

                       Hearing none, lets then head out

              to lunch.

                            (Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., a

                            luncheon recess was taken.)




















                     A F T E R N O O N   S E S S I O N

                                                      (1:21 p.m.)

                       MR. BREIDT:  I think we are ready

              to get started.  Our first presentation

              will be on the Electricity Transmission

              Data Needs, focus group results.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Thank

              you.  I do want to thank my so-author,

              Phillip Tseng for helping out on this

              project.  Both he and I are with the

              Statistics and Methods of EIA.

                       First the outline of the

              presentation.  I'm going to talk about the

              introduction and the need for this work,

              the participants and the methodology.

              We'll talk about some of the issues that

              were identified, the data needs, and the

              potential data sources that were mentioned

              by the focus group participants, and

              finally the focus group recommendations and

              observations and then a couple of questions

              for the committee.








                       The impetus for needing the input

              from stakeholders, the electric power

              division of EIA was interested in

              collecting transmission data so this

              provided a good opportunity for getting

              input from stakeholders.

                       We all know that the electricity

              industry is in a period of transition.  The

              information collected through the focus

              groups is being used as part of the input

              for both short-term and long-term planning

              for future EIA data collections and the

              presentation following mine will be by Bob

              Schnapp and he'll talk more about the

              input.

                       This work was also recommended by

              Doug Hale and his research work.

              Incidentally, Doug Hale will be available

              at the end of this session after Bob

              Schnapp's talk to answer some questions

              about his work.

                       We conducted four focus groups








              from November through January of 2003

              through 2004.  We began with the focus

              group on EIA staff.  We like to do this as

              both a pretest of the protocol but also we

              always get good data from these first

              sessions so we are able to use that data in

              addition to the other data that we get.  We

              had participation from six of the offices

              that are involved with electricity

              transmission one way or another.

                       The second focus group was with

              the DOE staff.  We had participation from

              three different offices, the Office of

              Electricity Transmission and Distribution,

              the Office of Energy Efficiency and

              Renewable Energy, and the Office of Policy

              and International Affairs.  We had some

              high level people for these groups.  In

              fact we had three office directors.

                       The third group was other federal

              organizations.  We had representation here

              from the Congressional Budget Office, the








              Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and

              the Department of Justice, each with about

              three participants in each of those groups.

                       In the fourth focus group we had

              nonfederal organizations.  In this we had a

              pretty wide range of people.  The

              organizations were Resources for the

              Future, the Edison Electric Institute, the

              National Rural Electric Cooperative

              Association, the National Association of

              State Energy Officials, the American Public

              Power Association, the Electric Public

              Research Institute, the Electric Power

              Supply Association, and we also had

              participation from the Department of

              Agriculture, the Rural Utilities Service.

              They were a little bit of an anomaly here

              but sometimes scheduling can be a problem.

                       You will notice that the first

              three sessions all had data users and for

              the most part so did the fourth session

              except we did have participation from the








              Edison Electric Institute.  They are

              advocates for the data providers so we had

              a little bit different representation

              there.

                       Also we conducted some telephone

              interviews, which I'll go into, but first

              I'll mention we did have 9 to 12

              participants in each of the groups.  This

              is a nice number of participants for focus

              groups, not too few, not too many people.

              Also the moderator has extensive experience

              with moderating focus groups on energy

              issues.

                       The participants in the telephone

              interviews, we interviewed the

              congressional staff.  We had three

              staffers.  Two were from the House and one

              was from the Senate.  They were involved

              with some of the energy committees.

                       We also had interviews with an

              energy consultant and a public utility

              commission in the midwest had three persons








              who provided written answers to us.  One of

              the first questions we asked of the

              participants was to ask them about emerging

              issues in the electricity transmission

              area.  This is both a good icebreaker and

              it gets them thinking about the future.

                       Some of these issues that were

              mentioned, in fact I think all these were

              mentioned more than once, determining the

              location of bottlenecks, the availability

              of the grid to generators, disturbances on

              the grid.  These were all going to be

              things that EIA should be concerned about

              in the future, reliability measures, the

              evolution of regional transmission

              organizations and the probable need to

              develop models with dynamic data

              requirements.  Also you are going to see a

              lot of changes in ownership and EIA should

              be aware of that.

                       Some more issues involved, the

              need for market transparency, the data








              collection problems due to joint ownership,

              owned versus controlled facilities, and how

              to go about surveying those groups, the

              need for dynamic ratings as opposed to

              static ratings, and the need for line

              maintenance data.

                       In terms of the data needs which

              were mentioned we grouped these into four

              classifications.  I'm not going to read

              through all of them.  There's a very long

              list but it's on page 2 of the handout that

              I distributed.  I'll go into a few of them

              that were some of the most frequently

              mentioned and involved the most discussion

              in some of the groups.

                       The first one, the economics of

              the grid, market power was one of the

              things frequently mentioned.  Particularly

              the Department of Justice people were

              interested in this.

                       In terms of policy development,

              reliability was mentioned over and over








              again.  The people were concerned about

              reliability, how to measure it, how do you

              go about trying to measure those variables,

              and so forth, also access to transmission,

              issues surrounding that.

                       In terms of physical planning

              needs the costs of investment in new lines

              were important.  The transmission flows

              within the states and the implications of

              transmission on capacity expansion

              decisions and costs were considered

              important, also outages and transmission

              line outages including frequency and

              duration of the outages and a number of

              occurrences of a transmission line denial

              was also of interest.

                       In terms of the potential data

              sources those listed up here were

              mentioned, the ISOs, the RTOs, the North

              American Electric Reliability Council,

              public utility commissions, FERC Form-1,

              which is the annual report of major








              electric utilities, licensees, and others

              also is a futuristic possible data source

              in the future, the possible use of

              telemeters in order to have real time data

              collected, also generator interconnection

              reports and the construction of

              transmission facilities reports.

                       The focus group recommendations

              and observations for EIA, these are things

              which some people thought EIA should be

              involved with either doing or thinking

              about.  EIA needs to define its role in

              goals and providing transmission data.  EIA

              needs to more fully cooperate with FERC.

              EIA should explain markets with narrative

              reports.  We are sometimes accused of using

              schematics too often without providing

              narratives.  And for geographical reporting

              purposes it might be useful to align the

              transmission data with RTOs, ISOs, or

              control areas.

                       In terms of the recommendations or








              observations for others participants

              thought it might be nice if the flow and

              capacity data using EIA, FERC, ISO, RTO,

              and RUS sources could be processed in some

              way, an integrated approach so that the

              data might be more easily used by some of

              our customers.  They thought that code

              names of reporting entities should be

              standardized in some ways for comparison

              purposes.

                       They also felt there was a need

              for NERC and EIA data to be combined again

              in some ways so it would be more useful for

              our customers.  But it was also mentioned

              that we should also be concerned about

              maintaining time series with similar

              indicators throughout.  We shouldn't break

              our time series if we could avoid it.

                       Questions for the committee, I

              think there's a general question and this

              is one that was discussed in pretty great

              length in some of the groups.  That was








              what should EIA's role be with respect to

              electricity transmission data collections

              and also any observations or

              recommendations regarding the focus group

              work.

                       Phillip Tseng and I could answer

              any questions that you have, I hope.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  So this focus

              group happened to be after last summer's

              incident where the whole grid went down in

              New York.  I was trying to see through the

              kind of data that people were recommending

              collected somehow reliability, robustness,

              and the aging of the whole infrastructure,

              which is indeed what the grid is, or part

              of the grid, if that came up as one of the

              concerns.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  It could

              very well be that the case that the August

              14 incident was on the minds of a lot of

              people in several of the groups.

              Certainly, for the congressional staff it








              seemed to be right at the top of their

              interests list, reliability and issues

              surrounding reliability.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  So do you think

              your conclusions are biased because of

              this?

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Well, I'm

              not sure exactly what conclusions we have.

              I mean, this is more of a matter of

              collecting data about what our stakeholders

              have to say rather than really arriving at

              conclusions about what should be done.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Well, but the

              stakeholder will say we want this kind of

              data to be able to predict future failures.

              So, I mean, the kind of data that they are

              suggesting to collect might be in that

              direction.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Sure, we

              should be aware of that, be made aware of

              this.  Are there other questions?

                       MR. BREIDT:  What are these








              futuristic telemeters?

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Actually

              I'm not that familiar with them.  Does

              Phillip want to say something about them?

                       MR. TSENG:  I think in the

              beginning Howard mentioned the purpose of

              doing a focus group actually reflects

              market structure changes.  Because of the

              market deregulation or restructuring

              actually stakeholders need to understand

              what's happening.

                       Policy makers want to understand

              reliability issues because when we talk to

              government officials, that's the key.

              Whether last year's incident played a role,

              actually we are not sure because actually

              within DOE at least we heard about

              reliability issues quite frequently.

                       In terms of market restructuring

              actually from a regulated market to a

              deregulated or restructured market it

              creates a lot of uncertainty in terms of








              investment and rate of return.  That's

              another area I think makes this work more

              interesting is that people actually demand

              this information.  So this is a background.

              It actually plays a role in terms of what

              drives the activity in collecting input

              from the focus group and what EIA can do.

                       I think another issue is

              resources.  There is information available

              but EIA has to evaluate what's available in

              terms of our capability of handling things

              and actually at the stakeholders meeting we

              heard people commenting on EIA has to

              define its role in providing the data

              because this massive amount of information

              and how to process it, how to collect it,

              and what kind of burden it could be imposed

              on respondents, those things have to be

              taken into consideration.  I think that's a

              general flavor.  I don't know if it answers

              the question.

                       MR. BREIDT:  I can ask you








              offline.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  This is just a

              broad policy issue, more for EIA as a whole

              and Doug when Doug comes up and gets

              questions.  The problem is going to be EIA

              getting money to be able to collect the

              data and do the analysis on the

              transmission system, which is, I believe.

              Desperately needed in the US.  There's

              nobody else out there with the capability

              to do that.  What you are going to need to

              do is to make a really strong case as to

              why this should be EIA's responsibility.

                       Focus group information ought to

              be able to help you, not necessarily in the

              form that you have it here but when you are

              making your case to Congress and others

              these are your stakeholders.  These are the

              people who are going to use them.  I don't

              think this information is telling you

              anything new or it's probably not telling

              Doug anything he didn't already write in








              his report.  But what it does is give the

              ability to add to that report justification

              for going after the stuff because the

              stakeholders believe it's an issue; the

              stakeholders believe EIA has a role in it

              and that's what you need to use this for.

                       It didn't tell you anything you

              probably didn't know already.  The

              stakeholders probably didn't tell you

              anything you didn't know but it gives you

              the justification for what you need to do.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Your

              point is well taken.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I'm going to say

              something that's going to let you know how

              little I know about the electricity sector

              but it seems to me the one thing the EIA

              could do as far as electricity transmission

              data collection goes is help to sort out

              just definitional issues that seem to exist

              in the system.  For example, I think

              Phillip was saying you mentioned in one of








              our breakout sessions that a 69 KV line in

              some situations may be a transmission line

              and in other situations it may be a

              distribution line.

                       I see someone like the EIA really

              to be in a position to come up with a

              sensible way of deciding what should it

              really be seen as.  That from an end user's

              point of view would be very useful and I'm

              sure from a policy point of view as well

              when you're putting things into NEMS or

              into any other kind of policy framework.

              It's bound to be useful.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Any other comments?

                       Okay, thanks, Howard.

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  Thank

              you.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Our next speaker will

              be Bob Schnapp from the office of CNEAF.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Good afternoon.  I

              appreciate your time so that we could share

              with you what we have been doing with








              revising our electric power data collection

              forms.

                       This is more of an informational

              briefing.  This is a briefing that I've

              given now probably about 40 or 50 times to

              our stakeholders, people that use our data

              or supply data to us, so I've condensed

              that a bit.  And then the last part is a

              little bit more information about just

              transmission data, what's available and

              items that we are proposing to add to our

              forms now.  So let me just generally go

              over what our project is and how we are

              handling it and then I'll get into a little

              bit more specifics.

                       The first phase is data

              requirements where we have to figure out

              what data we are going to collect.  This

              project is a follow-on to a project that we

              finished a few years ago called Electricity

              2002 where at that point we literally threw

              away all of our forms, all of or systems,








              and all of our publications and started

              from scratch.

                       This project is changing things

              around the margin.  We have already

              designed our new forms.  We have our

              Internet data collections in place.  We

              have our new dissemination products out

              there.  So now we are figuring out what

              things we need to change.

                       So with this we have come up with

              a list of key issues that we needed to

              address this time through and we'll have a

              list to go over with you.  We've done a lot

              of stakeholder coordination and one of the

              slides will show you who we've met with so

              far.

                       Then we've evaluated our

              confidentiality policy to see what elements

              we should either add or subtract from our

              data confidentiality policy.  And then

              there's a new requirement on

              confidentiality and I'll address that as








              well.

                       Then with all that we put together

              our proposal and issued it in a Federal

              Register notice at the beginning of this

              month.  So any comments from the public are

              due by June 1st.  If any of you are

              interested you can go out to our website.

              Its on top of our electricity website.  You

              can just click on it.  It will show you the

              Federal Register notice and it will also

              show you what the proposed forms will look

              like.

                       In addition to that another

              feature it will show you is a redlined

              version.  In other words it will have

              strike-throughs of all the words and

              elements that we are throwing away and it

              will have red highlighting for all the new

              elements.  So you won't have to sit there

              and find the old forms and try to figure

              out what's going on.  We tried to make it

              as convenient you as possible.








                       The second phase is the forms

              design.  That was part of the data

              requirements analysis and how we would be

              presenting it to the respondents.  That

              included any consolidations or moving of

              elements from one form to another,

              revisions that we would have there.  Then

              our proposal is to go to the Office of

              Management and Budget by about September of

              this year so we could have it cleared by

              November.

                       The third phase is once we have

              decided on everything we are going to be

              changing in the forms we have to figure out

              how to change it in the systems that

              collect and process the data, including our

              Internet data collection system.  All that

              would have to be in place by January of

              next year so that we could let all of our

              respondents know what it is that they need

              to provide to us.

                       Then in the fourth phase of








              dissemination we currently have two

              reports.  I'm not calling them publications

              any more because we don't publish them any

              more.  We only release them on the

              Internet.  That's the Electric Power Annual

              and the Electric Power Monthly.  We have

              detailed historical spreadsheets behind

              them that go back on the monthlies month by

              month, state by state, fuel by fuel going

              back to 1990.  And on the annual side it

              also goes back to '90 by sector and by

              state.

                       In this phase we also want to

              figure out how to redesign the Internet

              products since we are not going to be

              publishing hard copy any more.  We want to

              figure out how we should make it more

              usable and useful to people when they come

              to find our data.  Then we have

              consistently put out all of the public

              releasable data in large database sets that

              are out there now.  So all that would have








              to be available by September 2005 when we

              would be going out with our annual report.

                       I'm not going to go over any of

              these.  This is a list of some of the folks

              that we have already met with, some of our

              stakeholders, and just to go over a couple

              of the items that we have talked about, our

              Internet data collection system, over a

              third of all of our forms were submitted

              over the Internet last year.  That was the

              first full year of its operation.  We sent

              out passwords to almost everybody and we

              got a fairly good response.

                       This year we are trying to double

              that, to get at least two-thirds of all the

              respondents to file by the end of the year.

              As of right now we have about 5,000 out of

              about 38,000 forms that have to be filed,

              have already come in over the Internet.

                       We have sent out all of our

              requests.  Where we have an e-mail we have

              sent out all of our requests by e-mail to








              the respondents asking them to file.  We

              have also set up a help center so that if

              there are any questions, and there have

              been many, on how to get into the system

              and other issues.

                       We have established one phone

              number to call, one e-mail to send their

              e-mail questions to.  So we have done a lot

              of work on this side so that we could

              eventually free up the staff.

                       When the data comes in over the

              Internet it already has built-in edits so

              that we don't have to key the data in.  We

              don't have to review the data.  We don't

              have to make phone calls to make sure that

              the data is correct.  All that will be done

              inside the Internet.

                       So the key issues that we have

              been looking at in Electricity 2005 are the

              role of distributed and dispersed

              generation and I'll just quickly tell you

              the difference between those terms.








              Distributed technologies, in EIA speak

              anyway, is all the technologies connected

              to the grid that are located near the load.

              By located near the load we mean

              transmission-wise so that they have 69 KV

              voltage or less.

                       Dispersed generation are those

              facilities that are not connected to the

              grid.  They could be connected to an office

              building or they could be out in the middle

              of Montana powering somebody's log cabin.

              We don't have any plans to go out to all

              the dispersed generation folks and ask them

              for the numbers but we have added a couple

              of questions to our 861 form, which is on

              sales and revenue and goes to all the

              utilities, so they could tell us what is

              hooked up to them and they should know

              everything that's hooked up to the grid in

              some shape, manner, or form.

                       Then fuel switching, we have been

              getting more and more questions about that,








              particularly when the natural gas price

              goes high or the price of oil goes high.

              How can it be switching back and forth and

              what's the capability?  So we have added

              actually quite a few questions on our 860

              form which goes to all the power

              generators.  On that form we ask for,

              really, mostly static information, what's

              your capacity, your prime mover, what types

              of fuel do you use, so we have added that

              number of questions there.

                       On the 417 we have been trying to

              figure out what else to add on system

              emergencies.  We haven't quite gotten as

              much as input as we wanted to.  Homeland

              Security is very difficult to contact and

              meet with.  The Office of Energy Assurance

              just lost their office director so it has

              been difficult to get anything there.  So

              we are having very few changes on that

              form.  That form actually won't be in this

              clearance cycle.  That goes separately so








              we really only have another year on that

              one.

                       Transmission information, which

              I'll talk about at the end here, we have

              added a number of questions to EI-411 which

              goes to the NERC, North American Electric

              Reliability Council, added to the 412,

              which only goes to the municipals and

              federals, and 860 also.

                       Power imports and exports are

              currently collected by the Office of Fossil

              Energy.  They have indicated very strongly

              that they would like us to take over that

              responsibility.  It's being moved into that

              new Office of Electricity Transmission and

              Distribution and there are lots of

              questions about their makeup yet.  So they

              haven't made a decision yet on whether they

              can afford to have us do it and redesign

              the form.  So that's again not going to be

              in the package.  We have been trying to get

              that going but we are not there yet.








                       Then the plant costs for

              unregulated entities on the 412, this data

              was collected for the first time beginning

              in 2003.  Those facilities are having a

              hard time reporting.  It's about 30

              elements we ask them on financial

              information.  It has been difficult for

              them.  So we've culled out about ten

              questions to ask them and we got some

              feedback from some of the industry groups

              that were on the right target.  So from

              this Federal Register notice we'll see if

              everybody else agrees with that.

                       The last item is energy balances

              for unregulated entities were for these

              past three years on the 861 form.  That

              gave us some problems.  We are planning on

              moving that over to our monthly form that

              we go to, the utilities, IPPs and combined

              heat and power plants.

                       On confidential data this is a

              list of the data that we currently deem to








              be confidential, fuel costs and fuel stocks

              that we collect on a monthly basis,

              latitude and longitude.  This gets some

              laughs from some people.  You go out to

              Mapquest and you put the address in you

              will get the map coordinates.  You will

              even get an aerial view.  Terrorists will

              have lots of fun there.  But our philosophy

              was that we just didn't want to make it

              easy for everybody.  You could download one

              database and everyone would have all the

              locations, all the latitude and longitude,

              so we do share this information with other

              government agencies but our plan is not to

              put it out on the Internet.

                       Maximum tested heat rate under

              full load conditions, people can calculate

              the operating heat rate but this is just a

              maximum one and this would affect people's

              ability to compete.

                       Plant cost data, unregulated

              entities, which I was just talking about as








              an issue, all of that is confidential

              because it's financial information for

              facilities that are in competition.

                       Then monthly retail sales,

              revenue, and number of customers, only for

              energy service providers on a monthly

              basis.  But these same folks provide us

              information on an annual basis and that

              information is not confidential because we

              figure the data is old enough and it won't

              affect their ability to compete.

                       Then there's a couple of items on

              the emergency form that are confidential.

              One is who the contact is and this way

              those people are in contact during an

              emergency and the other is there's a

              narrative that they have to write to

              explain after the incident what happened

              and if they felt that this information

              would be going out, would be published in

              the Washington Post tomorrow, they wouldn't

              give the department a full analysis, a full








              true analysis, of what happened, so we've

              asked for that to be confidential.

                       So this is a list of all the

              elements that we currently hold

              confidential and these are the elements

              that we are changing in some shape, manner,

              or form.  We'd like to add two elements as

              confidential.  One is power flow cases, and

              these are transmission information, as well

              as transmission line maps that are handed

              to us.  This information is already given

              to FERC.  We really just get a copy.  They

              hold it confidential.  We are trying to get

              our policy in line with theirs.

                       Then there's a number of items

              that I just listed on the previous slide

              that we hold confidential that we are

              proposing to release after six months of

              holding it so that people could see stocks

              and fuel costs because by that time we

              figure the data is going to be old enough

              and won't affect their ability to compete.








                       The last item there is a new act

              which I believe this group has been briefed

              on before called the Confidential

              Information Protection and Statistical

              Efficiency Act.  What that does is it

              allows EIA to not have to provide

              information because of the Freedom of

              Information Act.

                       It absolutely covers us completely

              and we don't have to entertain those

              requests at all.  But what it does require

              us to do is that if another government

              agency promises to use the information only

              for statistical purposes then we are

              allowed to lend that to them.

                       There is a couple of other items

              that go along with that but of all the

              items that we are collecting and then the

              smaller set of those elements that we think

              should be held confidential only the last

              one here, the plant cost information for

              unregulated entities, we thought should be








              covered by that.  All the other information

              then we could share with other government

              agencies so that they could see the

              individual data.

                       So, moving on the transmission

              here real quick, I wanted to let you know

              what data the federal government already

              does collect because it does collect a lot

              of information.  On the FERC Form-1, which

              is filled out by investor-owned utilities,

              they provide information on existing

              transmission line characteristics, existing

              substation characteristics, and

              transmission lines added during the past

              year.  We mirror that on the 411 with the

              municipals and federals.

                       FERC further has a 715 which

              collects the power flow cases and existing

              transmission line maps.  Then we collect

              from NERC again, as I explained before,

              transmission line maps for proposed lines

              and in power flow cases for new lines.








              That's not collected by FERC.

                       Then on the emergency form there's

              a couple of check boxes there that they

              would have to indicate whether transmission

              lines are involved at all.

                       So given the work that Howard and

              Phillip had done and the report that Doug

              has put together in discussions with other

              groups around town we came up with this

              list.  I would say that this is probably a

              short list of items that EIA should collect

              but the analysis that a number people here

              mentioned should be done and the amount of

              money needed to do those things is going to

              take a longer time to get to.

                       In fact one of the items, I think

              Recommendation 11 in the Joint US-Canadian

              Task Force report on the blackout, suggests

              that EIA get together with a whole bunch of

              government and industry groups and figure

              out what information should be collected on

              reliability and then, given resources, go








              and collect that data.  So we are in the

              midst right now of preparing a budget

              submission for that.  We'll see how

              important it is to the Congress as to

              whether they would fund that.  That really

              is the bottom line.

                       So our short list then of the new

              elements that we are proposing in our new

              data collection forms is on the 412 just

              for the municipals and federals we would

              ask for existing transmission line upgrades

              and costs, which are not collected now, and

              then the same thing for system upgrades and

              costs.  Again, this is only for municipals

              and federals.  We can't force FERC to

              collect the same information but we hoping

              that they will follow suit with us.

                       On the 411 that the North American

              Electric Liability Council submits to us we

              are proposing to ask for scheduled and

              unscheduled transmission line outages and

              then we have cut-outs for AC and DC lines.








              We know that some of this information is

              already collected in a number of the

              regional councils so we are working with

              NERC headquarters to try to move the rest

              of them in that direction.  NERC

              headquarters has been very supportive of us

              in this.

                       Then on the 860 we would ask all

              the generators for any new generator

              interconnection data so it would be their

              location, ownership, and then cost and

              transmission rights of being hooked up to

              the grid.  This seemed to be a fairly

              contentious issue from the new generator

              point of view that they couldn't connect up

              and so there was a lot of questions.  Well,

              who is doing it?  What's the cost of those

              things and what are they allowed to do and

              not allowed to do?

                       I think that was the last one.  So

              that briefly is the Electricity 2005

              Project and then a subset of that what it








              is that we are proposing to add in the

              transmission area so we can dovetail that

              with what Howard and Phillip were just

              talking about.

                       So I would be glad to answer any

              questions that anybody might have now.

                       MR. BREIDT:  And questions?

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  On the side of

              reliability data of transmission lines you

              just showed that you are going to ask

              municipal and government lines to give you

              the data.  And you cannot force individual

              companies to provide you the same

              information, correct?

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Well, the federal

              government can only ask the question once.

              Because FERC collects transmission

              information we can't ask it again.  So they

              are collecting a whole set of information

              on transmission on the FERC Form-1 and we

              are saying we are collecting the same thing

              on the 412.  Now we are proposing to








              collect a few more data elements on the 412

              and we are hoping to entice them to collect

              the same information on the Form-1.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  That makes more

              sense.  Thank you.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Other questions?

                       Okay, thanks, Bob.

                       Next we have some time on the

              schedule for Doug Hale on transmission data

              for public policy.  Doug, are you actually

              speaking or are you just answering

              questions?

                       MR. HALE:  I was told to be here

              to answer questions and I'm happy to do

              that.  But the more I listen I'd like to

              talk for a minute or two first.

                       MR. BREIDT:  You go ahead.

                       MR. HALE:  First I want to thank

              the people who over the last year have

              suffered along on this project with me.

              Many of you are here.  I have had

              terrifically good comments in the last few








              months from the people working for Bob

              Schnapp and for Scott Sitzer.  These people

              are under enormous stress in their day to

              day work and they have taken a lot of time

              to help me get this thing more right,

              certainly more right than it was.

                       I've also had some real help from

              the ASA committee.  At the last session we

              talked and it was clear that the draft

              report we had was not salvageable and I

              presented a different way of trying to sort

              through this morass of transmission.  You

              all encouraged me to try it that way and

              either it worked or the reviewers were so

              beaten down they have decided they are not

              going to make any more comments that I've

              got to fix.

                       So I certainly do appreciate very

              much the work of the people here.  Of

              course, Herb and Renee and others in SMG

              took a lot of care going over our

              characterization of the existing data








              collections and for that stuff that was

              pure fantasy they certainly fixed that.

                       It turns out it's a very broad

              analysis with a lot of factual and

              theoretical pieces.  I keep getting

              reminded of what one of my Arab friends in

              graduate school told me.  He said, Doug,

              only Allah is perfect so I think you should

              read the report in that spirit.  We have

              tried very hard, but I'm sure there are

              things wrong.

                       Transmission is important now

              because of industry restructuring.  I want

              to spend one second on that.  Until fairly

              recently the industry consisted of pretty

              much stand-alone utilities with their own

              service areas, with their own lines, with

              their own generators.  In the northeast in

              particular there were interconnections

              between the utility service area but they

              were viewed as more of a way to economize

              on providing electricity because of








              differences in demand patterns or something

              that could be used just in emergencies.  So

              these weren't very important commercially.

                       It wasn't important from a

              regulatory point of view because it was

              only 6 to 15 or 20 percent of total cost.

              Almost all of the costs were in generation

              and in distribution so no one really paid

              that much attention to transmission per se.

                       In the new world the transmission

              system is supposed to be like a common

              market, a highway where you are moving

              electricity around.  That's fine except for

              a couple of things.  One, people are no

              longer able almost by themselves to control

              their own reliability systems.  So how

              reliable I am depends upon what Nancy does

              with her generators.  We saw a dramatic

              example of that in August.

                       It also means that I've got to

              know what Nancy is doing and she's got to

              know what I'm going to do and when I'm








              trying to do things that are going to

              impact her.  Because I make money from that

              I'd be backed off when that's appropriate.

              That's a new thrill for the industry as

              well.

                       FERC in its regulation realizes

              they have to encourage investment and

              modernization of the grid.  The only way to

              do that is to have a financially viable

              transmission business.  The FERC Form-1,

              which is a basic data collection form on

              the finances of these things, doesn't allow

              you to figure out what the economics of

              transmission are.

                       Again, that made sense because

              transmission, whatever it was, wasn't much.

              Now it's very important.  Then finally, as

              we've said a couple of times, markets are

              now very important and growth is very

              important.

                       So what I tried to do in this

              report is say okay, we have been collecting








              data now on this industry for at least 50

              years.  We have updated our reports

              periodically but this has been a real sea

              change, if you will.  What is it about our

              forms, and by "our" I mean the

              government's, FERC, EIA, whoever else?  Are

              they still getting at the questions that

              policy wants answered?  Is the system

              reliable?  What are the economics of this?

              Are they supporting growth?

                       So what you see in this report is

              a methodical, incredibly boring attempt to

              work through how the changes in the

              industry have affected the data that's

              available or needed to answer those

              questions and then to take a look at

              whether that information is being picked up

              on our forms currently and if not to make a

              suggestion of one potential way of

              collecting the data.  That's what I'm

              trying to do.  Everyone hasn't read this, I

              hope.  I thought you'd like to have a








              little background.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Questions?  Mark?

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I did read it,

              much to my chagrin.  It almost put me to

              sleep on the airplane but that's okay.

              This is actually not a question directed

              just to you since Howard and Bob are

              related to this as well.  By the way, the

              report is good.  Its a little long and

              droll but what the hey.  It's not exactly

              an interesting issue, except to those of us

              who worry about electricity reliability.

                       How do all these three things come

              together?  I mean, this is an issue of I

              read your report and I heard your

              presentation and I looked at your slides

              and I say well, we are all talking about

              the same basic issue.  What I don't see is

              integrating lessons learned from the

              different pieces.

                       How is what you are doing in

              Electricity 2005 being informed by Doug's








              report and by the stakeholders and vice

              versa?  So I want to be able to see at some

              point how this is all being integrated and

              coming together into one package.

                       MR. HALE:  The way I'm looking at

              it is that what I'm trying to do is get a

              view of the federal, not just EIA, interest

              in collection and as part of that get some

              idea of where EIA fits in in specific type

              areas.  It's driven entirely by the federal

              government's needs for data in areas of

              traditional responsibility.  That is one of

              the first hurdles.  A new data collection

              has to pass with OMB in order to be

              approved.

                       I think other things when you get

              past that initial hurdle that they are

              going to consider very much are things like

              what do the other users think about the

              data.  Is this responding to the public's

              other needs other than just purely the

              federal interest?








                       Bob has to worry about can you

              really collect this stuff on the ground.

              What does it really cost?  But Bob also has

              to worry a lot about what is FERC doing.

              So one of the things I was trying to do was

              lay out a picture of what the data

              situation is in such a way that FERC and

              EIA, Justice to a lesser extent,

              Agriculture to a far lesser extent, could

              look at it and say yeah, we all see the

              same picture.  Now let's use that as a

              picture for guiding our developments of

              transmission data collection.

                       That's how I see it.  I know that

              Bob has enough problems.  He needs another

              report like a hole in the head but he got

              it anyway.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Well, if I could

              just add to that, the project was

              originally set up so we could have focus

              groups, get information from them which

              would feed into Doug, who would write his








              report, which would then feed into us and

              we would use that information to figure out

              what should be collected by the federal

              government and then what EIA should do and

              try to get the other agencies that would

              have to be collecting the data also

              involved in it.

                       I can't say that the whole project

              from beginning to end has worked out the

              way everybody wanted it to but it's very

              difficult to get the attention of other

              agencies if they are not under the gun for

              it.  But with the recommendation coming out

              of the blackout task force report it may be

              an impetus for us to make sure that they

              will sit down with us.

                       FERC is a regulatory agency.  They

              have a different reason for collecting the

              data.  They do different things with it

              than we do.  So a lot of data collected by

              FERC is not made available in an easy to

              use manner.








                       So there are lots of things that

              the federal government needs to do.  Our

              objective is to work forward with them,

              NERC and the ISOs, the RTOs, everybody, so

              that we can get what it is that's needed.

              It's going to take quite a while.

                       Focus group meetings, they wanted

              real time data.  EIA is never going to

              collect real time data.  I mean, that's a

              fact.  That's just too expensive for us to

              process in any way.

                       But something on a more regular

              basis is possible but everything has to be

              laid out, who is going to collect it and

              then what are they going to do with it and

              how are they going to make it available to

              everybody.  So there really was some logic

              to how we were moving forward.  Time

              doesn't always agree with you but we were

              trying to move forward that way.

                       MR. HALE:  It would have been a

              lot clearer if the whole issue was a lot








              easier.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  It's a really

              complicated issue.

                       MR. HALE:  Then I would have

              gotten things done earlier.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  It would have been

              nice to see in your presentation referrals

              both to these other projects and whether

              they actually had any impact on the

              decisions being made to move forward.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Actually the one on

              new generator interconnects comes directly

              from Doug's report.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  And the other

              thing that might be useful is some

              schematic somehow.  I haven't figured out

              how to suggest you do that but something

              that visually shows the different data

              sources and needs and related to the types

              of report type outcomes you can get,

              reliability or congestion or something like

              that, something visual.  If you are going








              to go up to the Hill and try to get money

              for this you want to relate it directly

              back to the August 14 blackout report and

              you want to be able to visually show well,

              if you are going to ask us whether the grid

              is reliable enough to support our economic

              growth in the future this is what we need.

                       And be very explicit.  This is the

              type of report to get out and be very up

              front on it.

                       DR. BURTON:  I can't decide

              whether I've got a question.  I keep

              thinking of things and then you keep

              answering them.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Sorry.  I won't let

              that happen again.

                       DR. BURTON:  No, I'm going to ask

              questions that are probably impossible to

              answer now and it's your fault.  Does

              anybody have a sense of how long it would

              take to modify the collection processes to

              provide the data that's necessary to








              conduct the analysis that Mark or Doug

              talked about?  Does anybody have a sense of

              how much money it would cost?  If I said

              I'm king today, you can ask me and I'll

              give you the money, how much would we be

              talking about?

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Nancy, how much do

              we need for EIA, $70 million?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Eighty-five

              million would be nice.  One of the things

              that everybody seemed to want was real-time

              data, especially Doug.  Doug loves data and

              he wants it real-time.  As Bob said, some

              of the data are available on some ISO

              websites.  So there's some data like that

              out there.

                       We are probably not the right

              people to collect it but if FERC or some

              other regulatory body would work with

              everybody and get them and get them to make

              data available then at least that would

              solve one problem.  The data would be








              available.

                       But we are probably not the right

              ones to collect it.  Our traditional way of

              collecting data, and maybe we need to

              evolve in the future, too, is on a form

              that you can send to somebody and they can

              fill out.  You can do that by Internet but

              it's still a form that somebody fills out

              and sends back.  And we prefer not to have

              them enormous.

                       DR. BURTON:  What I'm trying to

              get a sense of is whether this is something

              that's tractable or whether we need to at

              least set it aside as an impossibility.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  Well, I think

              additional data is going to have to be

              collected and a number of agencies are now

              being put on notice because of

              Recommendation 11 that they need to sit

              down with us.  Once we do that and take all

              the input that we've gotten, and they may

              have other input as well, scope out what








              should be collected and by who, once you

              have that done you have to design the form

              over several months.

                       You have to put out a Federal

              Register notice for two months, address

              those comments, go back to OMB.  You are

              talking about a year of that particular

              process and probably a year or maybe two

              years to really evaluate what has to be

              done but maybe a year.  So I think we are

              talking about two years or so to get off

              the ground.

                       Certainly I would think, and I

              will go on the high side, a couple million

              dollars.  I don't know if that's a year or

              the total but I think at least a million

              dollars a year.  I've got to tell you that.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Another

              recommendation that has been made is to

              have somebody clean up the FERC Form-1

              data, which is another data set which is

              not usable.








                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I seem to be stuck

              on a theme today which happens to me

              sometimes.  Again I'm not sure I know what

              you are trying to get out at the end of

              this.  Maybe what needs to happen is asking

              and designing what the report is going to

              look like.  What report do you actually

              want to produce and what is the electric

              outlook going to look like if you had the

              information you wanted and then you work

              backwards and figure out how you are going

              to get that information.

                       It's possible you have done that

              but I haven't seen that.  It's hard for me

              to make judgments and, again, it's hard for

              you to make the argument to collect the

              data if who you are making argument to

              doesn't understand what benefit they are

              getting out the other end.

                       So if the benefit we can get out

              the other end is we can raise red flags on

              where we are going to have reliability








              problems out in the next couple of years,

              well, that's a really good outcome and

              everybody is going to want that and you are

              going to get a lot of support for that and

              then you are going to tell them well, this

              is what it is going to cost you to actually

              get that and if you can't pay for it you

              ain't going to get it.

                       MR. SCHNAPP:  That's why our

              budget request is being put together now.

              That will do that.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But it's hard for

              me to comment because I haven't seen that

              process.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, I think a

              lot of that is we really don't know what

              the report that we want looks like.  That's

              one of the reasons we had the focus groups.

              We wanted to know what the other people

              need.  Where are the data question people?

                       We have some analysis capability,

              too, but if we knew, what we'd like








              somebody to tell us, is what report should

              we be producing.  Now, Doug's data, he

              wants data input to models.  It's not

              necessarily a report.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But the models are

              going to be used for something.  I mean, in

              the end it's the electric outlook.  And you

              are going to add some stuff to it now or

              maybe you are going to create a new report.

              But I think you've got to work backwards

               this is what we think we need to be

              doing and then figure out the data you need

              to be doing that and then if it's not going

              to be funded then you are not going to do

              the report.  You are not going to have that

              information.

                       More and more you are being relied

              on to do and provide that analysis.  That

              was obvious  and clearly that's being

              the case.  So perhaps you need to make the

              argument stronger if this is what you want

              from us this is what it takes to get it.








                       Maybe you do it in other forums

              but --

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I suspect you're

              pointing out something that we are not

              doing very well.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  And it's really

              not an issue for the ASA group per se.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  What we did, Bob

              looked at Doug's report and he heard what

              the focus group came up with.  What he did

              this time was to make the changes to his

              current forms that would capture some of

              the data missing.  So that's what you can

              do now in a very short time period.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But if you were

              able to do that, what at you proposed here,

              what do we get at the end?  That's what I

              haven't seen?  What do you get in the

              electric outlook that you don't have now if

              you were able to do all this?  That's an

              important element.

                       MR. SITTER:  I think that there








              are two aspects to that.  One is to

              continue to give you what you are getting

              now with the changing market and one is

              what do we need in addition to be able to

              handle issues like blackouts.

                       Separating those two will help a

              lot as well.  I don't think it's just a

              matter of we need to do more so we can get

              more.  It may be a matter of with the

              deregulated market we can't do what we used

              to do or what we are giving you is not

              really even measuring what you would like

              it to measure or may not as this continues

              to grow.  There might be two aspects.

                       MR. BREIDT:  I think we'd probably

              better head into the breakout sessions.  We

              do have a break following the breakout

              sessions.  If we could get back in here

              about 3:30 I'll say 3:30 but I know it will

              go a little beyond that so let's shoot for

              3:30.

                       As far as the committee








              memberships at the breakout session, they

              will be the same as last time.  So if you

              were up here stay up here.

                            (Recess)

                       DR. LU:  Good afternoon.  Thanks

              for coming to my session.  This is ongoing

              project now and what I'm trying to talk

              about is how to estimate a weekly petroleum

              inventory using both weekly and monthly

              data.

                       I gave you the head note.  Table

              3, you can see that.  This one is the stock

              of crude oil and the petroleum products.

              On this slide you can see the first

              component is crude oil.  Then the rest are

              the petroleum products.  So these are the

              major categories, total motor gasolines,

              distillery fuel oil, residual fuel oil, jet

              fuel, unfinished oil or PEM (?), and other

              oil.  So that's the last component we are

              working out.  You can see on the first

              block the other oil including the propane








              on the very top, first one, in 2003.

                       In 2003, the very top one, you

              won't see the propane there but the second

              block you will see the propane because

              there is a new system coming in.  So you

              can see the third block is the weekly,

              which is the other oil not available until

              April, so I'm going to talk about this.

                       Our goal is to estimate other oil

              minus propane.  So in 2003 propane was

              included in the other oil mainly for the

              weekly other oil stock for weekly

              publication.  This is a weekly publication,

              Table 3.  We want to find what is the best

              way to estimate that and if there's any

              other alternative methods we want to know

              how to compare it with the estimate to the

              monthly data.

                       So what we have, we have two kinds

              of data or two sets, monthly stocks of oil

              component, monthly collections covers all

              of those seven.  Crude oil, motor gasoline,








              and other oil are about 15 different

              components in the highlighted area you can

              see.  That's including the aviation

              gasoline, kerosene, and all those minor

              components we put together as other oil.

                       So monthly it's the census.  So we

              will collect all the information of every

              minor component in those seven major

              things.  The weekly we only collect the

              seven categories.  So you can see there's a

              difference of the monthly data and the

              weekly data.

                       Then we compare these two data

              theories from January 2002 to June 2003.

              You can see here there is a discrepancy.

              This is about 20 percent.  In this one it's

              about 13 percent difference.  The unit is

              medium barrels.  That's quite a number.

              That's about 27 medium barrels difference.

              That's a lot.  So we want to avoid that

              estimating discrepancy happening again.

                       April 2004, early this month, we








              started collecting the weekly propane data.

              The propane data was collected just only in

              the winter months before but now we start

              collecting every month, every week, so

              that's a new thing.  That's your advice

              coming at the right moment.

                       My work is employ a new

              methodology to estimate the weekly stock of

              other oils.  I compare the correlations of

              other oil minus propane with the other

              major components, see how they correlated.

              Hopefully if they are the same patterns of

              the time series, seasonal patterns, then

              you can use that information.

                       Also we investigate a cross

              correlation associated with the transfer

              function model.  We are looking to the 

              modeling and the transfer function

              modeling.  The correlation you can see

              here, this dependent variable, motor

              gasoline minus propane.  The rest is the

              other major component.








                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Does it start

              with other oils minus propane?

                       DR. LU:  Yes.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  You said motor

              gasoline.

                       DR. LU:  And I'm using the five

              years data, January 1998 to December 2002.

              Let me give you the picture of this five

              years.  This is the ten years.  Everything

              here you can see all this component and

              this is the one, other oil minus propane,

              the yellow one.  It's our interest.  It's

              the other oil minus propane.  You can see

              the outline is quite similar pattern with

              the yellow one but it is not clear on the

              picture here.

                       So we look at the transfer

              function model, look at the simple other

              correlation, and the partial 

              correlation of the other oil minus the

              propane with the other major categories of

              petroleum products.  Then we need to apply








              the transformation degree level one and

              then the seasonality of 12  this time

              the series will be a stationary time

              series.

                       After that then we check the close

              correlation with the input variable, treat

              the others as an input variable, the other

              six major categories.  The output variable

              will be our interest to work out.  I'm

              going to show you two examples of this time

              series.

                       The stock of the distillate fuel

              and other oil minus propane, this time

              series of those two time products, and the

              close correlation significance is a lack of

               so which means once we have any

              significance at any leg the transport

              function model may be applied here.

                       If we look at the motor gasoline,

              start with the other oil minus propane,

              then you can see the picture here and the

              cross correlation.  None of the legs is








              significant which means if I'm trying to

              apply the transfer function model motor

              gasoline would not be a candidate as an

              input variable.

                       But distillate could be a

              candidate as an input variable.  So my

              question to committee members is are there

              other alternative methods so we can

              estimate a weekly other oil minus the

              propane.

                       Remember, now I don't have to say

              minus propane because propane will be

              automatically separated out from other oil

              as you can see here.  The last one, April

              9, the propane is out.  So this is my talk.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  I think we have

              plenty of time for questions.  Just to

              start out and to make certain things clear,

              if you go to your slide 5 you are talking

              about the comparison of weekly estimates

              and monthly data?

                       DR. LU:  Yes.








                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Can you give us a

              little bit more detail?  This is not a

              result of the transfer function model, is

              it?  How do you get these estimates?

                       DR. LU:  This one, the other oil

              will include the propane because it's 2002

              and 2003.  Month 3, the blue one is a

              census so we collect everything.  But the

              red one is an estimate.  It's weekly and

              then converted to the monthly.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  So add them up?

                       DR. LU:  No, it's not added up.

              Its just an estimate to there.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Can you tell us

              how it was estimated in the past?

                       DR. LU:  The weekly converted to

              the monthly is derived by computing the

              average daily rate of the stock change for

              the minor product of each month.  So you

              have to figure out each month the minor

              product then the stock change.  So you take

              an average of that based on the last six








              years, then using this daily rate and the

              minor stock from the previous months and

              adding it up.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  On a moving average

              type of thing, I think.

                       DR. LU:  It's already an increment

              in the system so they just put the data in

              and then they will 

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  And you are trying

              to make this one better, right?

                       DR. LU:  Yes, it's the current

              system.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  The discrepancy

              is what made people decide we needed to do

              something.

                       DR. LU:  This is the current

              system we have.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Again, the

              clarification thing, we have plenty of

              time.  I looked at your cross-correlation

              of distillate with other minus propane and

              that's about .348 at zero.  Shouldn't it be








              pretty close to your correlation in your

              slide 8 where you are doing essentially the

              same correlation?

                       DR. LU:  Do you mean here?

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Yes, here you have

              this  .348.  Shouldn't they be the same

              or shouldn't they be pretty close?

              Essentially they are  different data

              sets?

                       DR. LU:  No, this one is --

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  This will help me

              understand what I'm dealing with as far as

              the data.

                       DR. LU:  This one I did not

              transform.  So once you difference once and

              then difference seasonality so the

              correlation will change because I just

              treat as regression data  check.

              That's the first thing you do.  You do

              well, look, if I had two pair of similar

              sets of the data then I would look at

              what's the correlation.  Then I would








              realize it's a time series and you have to

              filter out the seasonality.  Then also you

              have to transform to a stationary time

              series in order to do any filtering or

              connections.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  So what you are

              proposing to do is estimate the others

              through the relationship to distillate and

              motor gasoline because you saw a

              correlation?

                       DR. LU:  Yes, I'm proposing to do

              it.  This is my interest.  With any object

              these are the major ones, motor gasoline,

              jet fuel, distillate, residual, unfinished

              crude oil, or even propane.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I'm trying to

              figure out why stocks of these other fuels

              would be related to motor gasoline or

              distillate.  You can show me all the

              correlations you want but I'm trying to

              figure out from the standpoint of how the

              industry works why there would be a








              relationship.  I certainly wouldn't go and

              start estimating something unless I can

              explain --

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, right now

              this is not an industry analysis.  It's a

              data analysis.  It is something that has a

              predictive capability based on that.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  I do the

              short-term energy outlook forecast, which

              includes other oils.  I'd like to make a

              suggestion on your analysis and raise one

              or two questions that may address your

              question.

                       First off, the other oils contain

              several products that don't have the same

              seasonality.  For example, included are

              asphalt and road oil, which is a high

              summer demand product.  Then you have

              butanes, ethane and butane, which come from

              natural gas liquids which have seasonality

              very much like propane but also distillate.

              So the rationale between relating other








              oils to distillate is the seasonality and

              the inventories that distillate heating oil

              inventories are lowest during the winter or

              drop during the winter and the same thing

              happens with the LPGs that remain in the

              other oil category.  They are also winter

              demand products.  So the correlation there

              could be related to you're going to have a

              large draw on distillate when it's very

              cold and you will also have a large draw on

              the LPGs.

                       But that's not at all consistent

              with the other components of the other oils

              category.  What we do in the short-term

              energy outlook is we forecast those

              components separately, where we look at

              LPGs produce a separate forecast for LPGs

              based on monthly stock changes and also a

              separate forecast for the other products

              that may have their own seasonality.  So

              hopefully that clears up your question of

              the correlation.








                       My suggestion was that you, number

              one, of course, when looking at other oils

              even econometrically separate out the

              components to sub-aggregates, probably

              improve your look at the seasonality.

                       Number two, you do the analysis

              without transforming and what I've found is

              you do a better job looking at first

              differences, in other words stock changes

              rather than the level of stocks.  Since I

              made that change a year or so ago it's

              ended up with better forecasts.

                       The third thing I suggest is when

              you are doing essentially a forecast that

              you can also use the forecast of the

              short-term energy outlook which comes out

              around the eighth of the month.  I'm not

              sure why we are doing two separate

              forecasts.  That's my only comment.

              Thanks.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  You are not

              talking about doing a forecast.  Now you've








              got me confused.  You are not talking about

              doing a forecast.  You are just talking

              about putting out the data, estimating the

              data for --

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, you can

              look at it as a forecast because we don't

              have data for other oil.

                       DR. LU:  We don't have the weekly,

              see.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  We are going to

              predict what's going to be reported for

              other oils that week.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Right, but you're

              just estimating how much.  You are not

              doing a --

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  You can write it

              as a forecast, though.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  So where do you

              get your data for the short-term energy

              outlook?

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  For the

              short-term energy outlook we are using the








              exact same data but I do not use the

              estimates of other oils in the weekly

              petroleum status report.  I use my own

              estimates.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Why couldn't you

              use his own estimates?

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  It's possible.

              There are some problems.  Number one, it

              doesn't meet --

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  And shouldn't you

              be using the same thing anyway?

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  Number one is our

              estimates are certainly not better than the

              estimates published on the web server.

              They are often different, not necessarily

              better.  I have done analysis over the last

              couple of years.

                       Number two, there's a fundamental

              difference in how the numbers are used.

              For example, when a petroleum supply

              monthly comes out both of us end up having

              to adjust our numbers.








                       I can adjust my numbers easily

              because I simply change all of my history.

              The problem with the week petroleum status

              report is that the history between the

              petroleum supply monthly and when they are

              publishing doesn't change so it has

              significant ramifications on their

              estimates of other oil demand.

                       I think if you start looking at it

              that's where you have a bigger problem.

              You have some problems in your stocks but

              I've got a feeling that your error's in the

              other oil demand because other oil demand

              is imputed from the stock change, that you

              actually have larger errors in your other

              oil demand.

                       So the short-term energy outlook

              forecast can be used but we only come out

              once a month and they are doing their

              estimates weekly and there are

              inconsistencies in the structure of how

              each estimate affects everything else in








              the body of work.  So it could be used as

              an input but I'm not sure it can be used as

              a replacement and I'm not sure that it can

              be made consistent.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  It certainly seems

              to me to be a problem.  Maybe I'm missing

              something but it seems to me to be a

              problem to have two separate parts of the

              organization using the same --

                       DR. LU:  Well, we both use the

              same data.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But you have two

              separate estimates, energy outlook

              included.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  You see, he

              doesn't really care about weekly data.

              He's doing monthly and he's doing forecasts

              up to two years out.  His main purpose is

              forecasting.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Right, but if his

              monthly data is different than your weekly

              data --








                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, our monthly

              data are different from our weekly data,

              too.  We have a survey that gives us weekly

              estimates but then we get monthly data two

              months later that replaces them.  So the

              weekly gives you preliminary estimates for

              what's going on and then it's replaced by

              better estimates later after the monthly

              surveys are in.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But within that

              same time frame you have produced another

              short-term energy outlook, right?  So

              between the time you have been estimating

              weekly data you have been doing a new

              short-term energy outlook potentially using

              different estimates of other oils.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  Well, the benefit

              of this work is hopefully I will be able to

              change that.  That's going to be one of the

              objectives particularly I'm here for, that

              well be able to reconcile the two.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  The purpose of the








              weekly estimate is just for about a month

              and a half.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Yes, I mean, we

              do compare weekly to monthly and we

              probably make sure they represent one

              another pretty well.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  As soon as the

              monthly figures come the weekly numbers are

              not important any more?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Right.

                       DR. LU:  Because the weekly is

              timely so we want to release as early as

              possible so industry can use it.  Is that

              right, Mike?

                       MR. CONNER:  That's correct.

                       DR. LU:  Well, he is the manager

              of the weekly so he will have more idea.

              You can see here the weekly is published

              April 9 but a monthly only January.  So the

              monthly will have a couple months lag

              behind.  So what we are trying to do is

              using the monthly and trying to estimate a








              weekly based on what we have.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  It seems to me one

              other accommodation is for the two groups

              to talk and make sure you are using the

              same database and perhaps use the last

              monthly estimate from there and worry about

              it because it is really very short-term,

              like a month and a half.  So think of it

              that way rather than a whole new model.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  It's a different

              purpose and we certainly need to look at it

              but I'm not sure his estimate is going to

              be a replacement for his product.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  It wouldn't be.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But you certainly

              have to make sure there's a consistency

              between what you are estimating on a weekly

              basis and what they are using in the short

              term.  It doesn't have to be the same

              number but it better not be very different.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Do you use the

              weekly numbers in the STEO or do you just








              use the monthly data for the STEO?

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  For all the other

              products or other oils?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  No, for all the

              other products.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  Yes, because they

              are survey numbers.

                       MS. KHANNA:  Well, I have a very

              basic question here which is how important

              in the scheme of things are these data on

              other oils?  I mean, if it's a small

              fraction of everything we have 

              cost-benefit analysis.

                       We could have a weekly survey

              going out and spend a lot of money and get

              really accurate data and not have to

              estimate anything.  But if on the other

              hand in terms of let's say the STEO or any

              other model that you run, these other oils,

              it's really almost as good as the  than

              just running a simple correlation of

              something that's probably just fine.








                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I'm not

              complaining about the correlation.  I want

              to know is there a reason for the

              correlation before you actually use it.  I

              mean, there has to be a logical reason for

              it.  That was the starting point of my

              question, which you answered partially, but

              I don't have a problem with doing the

              estimate.  I was just trying to get a feel

              about why.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I completely agree

              with you but also, just thinking about it,

              I mean we went on this big circle of

              discussion but your point is absolutely

              correct.  Before you run any correlation

              you want to know why should the two things

              be correlated in the first place because

              otherwise you can get something very

              spurious.

                       My other question is yes, okay, we

              could spend a lot of human hours deciding

              all of this but if it's really just one








              little bit of a whole report that goes out

              and it's not a big part of that is it worth

              spending that much time or have you got

              something like a correlation?  We don't

              even know why it's correlated, let's say,

              worst case scenario, but it seems to

              predict well on the very short-term basis.

              It is not a big fish in the pond.  Maybe

              you don't want to know more.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  That's related to

              the other question I was asking.  When you

              go back to the reason for doing this you

              showed us some amount worth of data that

              had only a couple of points that were out

              of whack.  How many times has that

              occurred?  I mean, up to that point it

              didn't look so bad.

                       DR. LU:  Yes, exactly.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Mike is at the

              table now.  He is the survey manager for

              the weekly and has worked a lot on those

              problems.








                       MR. CONNER:  When we started

              hearing this talk I said to Tammy up there

              quietly well, we define a big discrepancy

              as one that leads to John Cook being called

              into the administrator's office.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  We have an

              administrator who knows a lot about

              petroleum.

                       MR. CONNER:  This was enough to

              cause that to happen.

                       MR. TSENG:  I have one comment in

              response to Mark's comment about

              methodology to correlate things.  This is

              about industry.  If you look at a component

              of other oils we have some of the elements

              like hydrocarbons, oxygenates, aviation

              gasoline, blending components, naphtha.  So

              some of the components are actually

              intermediate products.  They are blending

              components. Some components like lube oils,

              waxes, coke, asphalt, those are end

              products.








                       So if you don't fix the basic

              demand supply refinery operation to capture

              some of the intermediate product will be

              used to produce end use products you are

              not capturing why they correlate or they

              don't correlate.  Seasonality may capture

              some but you really have to understand

              which component is related to end use

              product, which components actually are end

              use products.

                       So if you see end use product, say

              demand for lubes and waxes increase, then

              even though the refinery output of this

              product is more or less stable to stock

              components but their elements would change.

              So you are adding up several elements which

              may have opposing forces and which can

              change your estimate.  So using motor gas

              or distillate is not the best way to

              capture that correlation.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  I mean, all of

              what you said is correct that there are








              lots of different things involved there

              that respond to different forces, but

              ultimately a lot of this depends on how

              much crude oil is being run through

              refineries.

                       To some extent, at least, the same

              forces the same basic you've got this much

              oil and you get this much product out of

              it, so if you run less oil you get less

              product and that affects all the products

              to varying degrees, granted, but it does

              affect all of them.

                       So there are certain underlying

              reasons why all of those products move in

              the same direction and your point regarding

              the intermediate products, those also are

              coming from the same pool of crude oil.

                       MR. TSENG:  Yes, if you look at

              refinery operation you have this category

              called LRGs, liquefied refinery gases.

              That could be from refinery, that could be

              from imports, or that could be from natural








              gas liquid plant.  So the components may or

              may not be directly related to refinery

              operations.

                       Crude oil is another stream so the

              process is different.  I think the LRG

              category is more or less for blending

              components and maybe for petrochemical feed

              stocks.  So I think we getting in the weeds

              here but the thing is because of the

              characteristics of other oils it's not so

              simple just run using motor gas or

              distillate as driving forces to estimate.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Remember, what

              was done before was basically the

              assumption that you took the stocks of

              other oils on the market or seasonal

              patterns and turned them over six years.

              That didn't do badly for a long time.

              That's a pretty simple model.  There is no

              underlying industry knowledge in there.

              It's just the seasonal pattern.

                       So there was a change last year








              when natural gas prices went up and there

              was some change in the news coverage but he

              has the point that do we care about

              something small.  In fact the weekly has

              improved things a lot already because now

              we have propane data separately.

                       So that other oil stock where you

              saw the big discrepancy included propane

              and now it's not in there so we have a

              smaller group of things.  Our error

              hopefully will certainly be no larger.  But

              that's a smaller set of products that we

              are trying to follow.

                       MR. TSENG:  And also petrochemical

              feedstock is in the other.  So when natural

              gas price is high petrochemical feedstock

              is more valuable.  That's what is driving

              the changes.  I think when you look at the

              market, and I am just trying to follow

              Mark's approaches, understand the market

              and understand why it happens and then find

              the best way to model it.








                       MS. KHANNA:  But then if you've

              got such a heterogeneous group of products

              in there  would mean that either you

              model them each separately or at least lump

              them together with products that have

              similar markets, and that's exactly why I

              asked my question because this could become

              a monstrous project.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I think I'd look

              at what Pyng's done to aggregate products.

              There are several things aggregated.  That

              may be a good starting point, anyway.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  If there are

              components in here that have a rational

              reason to be related to motor gasoline and

              components that have a rational reason to

              be related to distillate then you split the

              two, estimate them, and put them back

              together.  When the students come to me and

              they do these correlations I send them away

              and go tell me why first and then you can

              do the correlations.  They get pissed off








              when they give me correlations without

              relations.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  As a statistician

              we frequently do these sorts of things

              without knowing anything about the

              industry.  We do a pretty good job

              sometimes 

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I know you know

              these things.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I think the

              relationship should show up in the

              correlations.  I don't want to know that

              there are relationships before I look at

              correlations.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  But I can show you

              lots of correlations between things that

              are just by accident.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I think over a

              six-year period of monthly data I would be

              surprised if there were spurious

              correlations.  They are a highly seasonal

              series.  I think the high correlation you








              see is the seasonality lines up pretty well

              because the seasonality is a very strong

              characteristic of 

                       MR. CONNER:  To some extent a lot

              of these intermediate products are

              byproducts of running crude oil for the

              purpose of making gasoline.  So as you run

              more crude to make more gasoline you

              automatically get more of these other

              things as well which is one reason why we

              think they are probably connected.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Do they correlate

              with refinery output?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  This is

              inventory --

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  I realize but the

              point is you get more inventory on this

              stuff when you get more production because

              there's  demand for  on this stuff

              I don't think anybody strategically plans

              for many of these things to keep them in

              stocks.  They are just there as byproducts








              and they sell them when they can sell them

              and they don't sell them when they can't

              and so they have stocks.  Maybe I'm wrong

              on that.

                       MR. CONNER:  I think that's

              essentially what we are proposing here,

              that the stocks of the gasoline and the

              distillate and the other major products are

              sending you information because we have

              survey data on those.

                       MR. BERNSTEIN:  Well, then that's

              a good explanation and that's fine.  That's

              what I needed to hear first.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I was going to

              say what was done before, the one that was

              in the discrepancy, was only based on

              monthly data, the seasonal patterns for

              monthly data, took the last monthly

              observation in March and forward.

                       So our thought here was maybe we

              could learn something better by looking at

              some of the other series that we have








              weekly data for.  So you are looking for

              relationships with the monthly data but

              then we might be able to translate to a

              model that would help us do a better job

              weekly.

                       MR. CONNER:  And that in fact I

              think is part of the reason you see some

              improvement later.  I mean, part of the

              discrepancy came from a problem in

              Venezuela that led to less crude oil going

              to refineries.  But we didn't pick up on it

              quickly enough and eventually we end up in

              the administrator's office.

                       I think there was another comment

              here where somebody said we've got a

              problem with the demand that, of course, is

              related to the stock changes.  In fact

              that's the whole reason that we have this

              other oils component in here, so that we

              can do the total product inventory and use

              the difference there to calculate total

              demand and then the other oils fall out as








              the difference between the major product

              demand and the total demand.

                       MS. KHANNA:  I'm just looking at

              your slide there.  The pale blue, that's

              propane and the blue in the middle right

              next to the yellow line, that's your others

              minus propane.  If you look at those two

              series they track the yellow almost

              perfectly.

                       So if you are going to be

              collecting weekly propane data your problem

              might actually dissolve in terms of getting

              the two things to be --

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Actually, your

              correlation with propane was .6 so you

              haven't run that cross correlation yet.

                       DR. LU:  No.  I just run two to

              show you one category of the petroleum

              product may be cross-correlated with the

              other one, with the one we are interested

              in.  There are six of them and I only ran

              two.  One showed where there has a  and








              the other one has nothing.

                       Besides this any other suggestions

               I look differently as a transfer

              function model or --

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Yes, I think I was

              going to say I think the discussion so far

              we have been worried about the model

              formulation.  I think that does need some

              more thinking and getting with the monthly

              people and try to learn from some of the

              stuff they are doing.

                       I think, given that you are going

              to model, there's another decision, I

              think.  It seems like a good thing  how

              much money or how much effort 

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  That should be a

              fairly simply model.  It was pretty simple

              before.  We are not looking for something

              complicated.  We think we can do something

              so we can do a better job than we had

              before.  We know it will be better because

              we have propane.








                       DR. NEERCHAL:  So can I ask the

              committee to think about the methodology

              question?  Transfer function is a linear

              regression so this seems like  the

              other series have information and a

              regression is a way to capture it

              definitely.  It is basically an

              interpolation using some extra series.

              That's what you are really doing.  So it

              seems like a good candidate, methodology.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  We might look at

              trying to group some of the minor products

              to see if they have some that group better

              in terms of seasonality for predictive

              purposes  provide some guidance 

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  Well, separating

              them out and then going to estimating based

              on first inferences of stock change instead

              of stock level.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I think what

              Ruey-Pyng came up with in terms of looking

              for the relationship would be to use the








               difference and the seasonal

              differences.

                       MR. LIDDERDALE:  Well, that's what

              I'm going to do when I get back to the

              office, try to figure those out.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  And I think the

              other question  how do you compare

              estimates of the others and the other

              question about should you use absolute

              deviation or square 

                       DR. LU:  What happened here is we

              have the monthly but the monthly is not up

              to April.  So if we are trying to say

              something about April 16 we need to

              forecast three months to here and then we

              will have the monthly data.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  One of the things

              that I think you should do is after a month

              and a half you get another estimate.  I

              think that is one check already that you

              are fairly close to whatever methodology

              you come up with whenever there is a








              comparable estimate from another

              methodology something that's independent so

              that they look pretty close.  I think

              that's a check you should run in checking

              the estimate.

                       But while you are exploring

              different models, for example, I'm not sure

              it will make a whole lot of difference

              whether you use mean absolute error or

              square root. i don't think it's going to be

              a particular issue, assuming  transfer

              function model  any other comments?

                       DR. LU:  Well, we will work with

              the STEO and compare the methods and then

              see.  I believe Mike has proposed other

              improvements.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Actually, Mike

              and Mike, there is something that they are

              using already.  There's a number in here so

              they have a methodology that they are

              using.  That will certainly be one that we

              end up comparing to in looking at








              alternatives.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  Thank you very

              much.

                            (Recess)

                       MR. BREIDT:  We are now ready to

              summarize the breakout sessions and we will

              begin with Najaraj Neerchal.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  We had a very good

              breakout session.  We had lots of lively

              discussion, not only among the committee

              members but also with the audience involved

              and it was a very good thing because two

              people in the audience turned out to be

              very important people for the project.  One

              of them was Tancred Lidderdale from

              Short-Term Energy Outlook and the other

              person is Mike Conner from Oil and Gas.

                       The problem, very simply stated,

              here is the breakdown of all the petroleum

              products.  You have crude, motor gasoline,

              distillate fuel oil, jet fuel, unfinished

              oils, propane, and other oils.








                       Essentially you have weekly

              estimates available for everything here

              except for other oils.  For other oils and

              everybody else you have monthly data.  The

              challenge is to come up with weekly

              estimates for other oil to match with the

              others so that we can get a weekly estimate

              of the whole thing.  So it's a simply

              stated problem but, like all the simply

              stated problems, it's more complicated than

              it looks.

                       The current methodology uses

              historical daily averages and that's some

              kind of a ratio, adds things up to a month

              and comes up with a weekly estimate based

              on historical daily averages.  The proposal

              is to use something like the transfer

              function model or any other suggestion that

              the committee can come up with and improve

              the current estimate.

                       The first question the committee

              asked is how important it is to really








              improve this estimate.  And it turns out

              that the administrator knows a lot about

              petroleum products.  So a small difference

              here will be noticed.  So it's a good time

              to put something forward and say hey,

              statistics makes a difference.  So I think

              it is an important problem that we solve

              that one.

                       So the discussion actually had a

              very good of exchanging information among

              Mike and Tancred and Nancy.  That was a

              very good outcome.  I think it justifies

              everything else.  I think the statistics

              part in this project is somewhat secondary.

              Hopefully something simple will come out

              based on the discussion among the three

              groups.  But the most important thing is

              hopefully this meeting has given impetus

              for them to sit down together and come up

              with a combined approach.  I will stop

              right there.

                       MR. BREIDT:  I'll be summarizing








              the other session, which was on testing EIA

              surveys.  This was also a very interesting

              breakout session directed by Stan Freedman

              and Bob Rutchik.  Shauna and Karen were

              also contributing.

                       The committee was asked to

              consider two basic questions, one of which

              was whether EIA was currently using

              appropriate methods for testing their

              surveys and the second was were there other

              methods they should be considering.

                       The kinds of methods currently in

              use include a pre-survey design visit, and

              this was something that had originally been

              suggested by Seymour Sudman, where site

              visit teams actually go out to the people

              who will be filling out these surveys down

              the road asking if they actually understand

              the questions and then finding out

              something about the structure of their data

              systems so that they know how easy it is to

              get those data out of the record systems at








              the top of the form.

                       The second kind of method was

              cognitive interviews and these were cold

              interviews in which you just show up with

              the form and have somebody work their way

              through it while you are standing there,

              which wasn't thought to be useful by EIA.

                       Then there were respondent

              debriefings on completed survey forms.  So

              they send them out, give them some time to

              look at them, fill them out, and then show

              up with a site visit to work their way

              through the forms and decide how well the

              respondents are understanding what's going

              on.

                       Then finally there are the

              usability testing methods and those are

              really separate from the respondent

              debriefings and the other methods.  The

              usability is like on a web-based survey how

              well do you navigate through the fields and

              things like that.








                       So the general impression from the

              committee was that these were appropriate

              methods for testing surveys.  One of the

              questions that came up was the number of

              iterations that were used in doing this

              testing.

                       Ideally you would have something

              along the lines of a pre-test and then a

              design and then a test and then a revision

              and then another test because the first

              revision might introduce new problems.  So

              they don't always have time to do that but

              if they did that would be ideal.

                       So the other major question was

              were there other methods.  One of the

              things that came up in discussion was that

              when they go out with the site visit team

              at the point of the respondent debriefings

              they often have in the room a number of

              people including someone at an

              administrator level and someone at a clerk

              or flunky level and this can cause a lot of








              problems.  It can cause different kinds of

              problems, at least two different kinds of

              undesirable effects.  One is the impress

              your boss effect where the data clerk is on

              their best behavior to understand

              everything perfectly and that may be

              unrealistic and artificial in what actually

              goes on in filling out the survey so you

              may not get good information in that

              direction.

                       Another is that the flunky may be

              intimidated by having the boss there so the

              natural suggestion was to consider separate

              debriefings for the two kinds of people to

              split up this hierarchy so you get a little

              bit of different information from the two

              sources.  Ideally you would have some sort

              of overlapping questions to address some of

              the same issues but addressed to the two

              different kinds of people.

                       So those were some of the main

              points that came up.  Were there any other








              things that the committee would want to add

              to that?

                       So I think that we are two minutes

              ahead of schedule.  I'm so happy.  We will

              just turn this over to Inderjit Kundra, who

              will be talking about the natural gas

              production monthly survey.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  I'm Inderjit Kundra

              from SMG.  Good afternoon.  EIA is going to

              conduct this natural gas production monthly

              survey.  The reason why we are conducting

              it is because the data which they are

              receiving is not timely.  I think why we

              need the survey is clear from the slides

              that the data which they are being received

              this data  not timely.

                       The other thing is that they

              probably doubt the accuracy of the data

              also.  So there is a need for that because

              they want to disseminate it in a timely way

              as reliable data so we need to conduct this

              survey.








                       The survey, the results are needed

              for not only the US but for these big

              regions also, Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico,

              Oklahoma, Wyoming, and others.  So what we

              did, how we were going to accomplish it, I

              used the form  which is given in

              Cochran, Second Edition.  That's called the

              presumed optimum allocation formula.

                       In order to select that sample we

              needed a frame.  The frame is the 2002

              EIA-23, which has been prepared by the

              Dallas Field Office.  The total stream

              sizes, the 20,906 operators, would look at

              this.  Out of this, 5,527 are zeros, 8,094

              are blanks, and the remaining are only

              7,285.

                       For the purpose of this exercise

              we used 7,285 because we just  from the

              frame.  When we used that formula we came

              up with the sample size.  We used the

              expected  level as 1 percent and 5

              percent.








                       If you look at the first line it's

              giving you the sample size needed for the

              US, for the nation as a whole.  The first

              column is giving you the number of

              companies which are selected with

              certainty.

                       Under the footnote we say that

              certain companies were selected as follows.

              Any operator who are having a method of

              size greater than or equal to the total

              size divided by 2M, that M is the sampling

              unit to be selected, the sample size.

                       So when we went to the dealer the

              next lines are given for the six strata

              which we have here, Texas being number one.

              If you look at that, the sample size which

              is needed, if we go to the regions we need

              358 companies in order to provide an

              estimate at the level of 5 percent at the

              regional level.

                       But we don't so many companies

              because 41 companies which have been








              repeated, which have got multiple strata,

              multiple regions, those 41 companies have

              repeated 102 times so it comes to about

              256.

                       But then the problem of this was

              that they want to determine the Federal

              Gulf region at a higher precision  1

              percent.  So if we add that sample size we

              add only 7 more companies and the sample

              size comes to about 263.

                       But because  it is expected

               pretty sure that if we use the 5

              percent of generation for these regions the

              coefficient of variation for the national

              level will probably be less than 1 percent.

                       We are testing.  In order to make

              sure which method will work we are testing

              two sample selection schemes.  One is the

              single space certified random sample and

              the second is the probability proportion to

              size.

                       So we are in the process.  We have








              selected a sample at least for the

              probability proportion to size and we are

              looking at it and we are trying to compare

              it, go back to the years like 2001 and 2000

              and see how much nonresponse is still there

              when we are looking at this and how much we

              are expecting.  We don't know about that.

                       Then the question which is how we

              are treating the zeros and blanks, we

              selected a sample of 100 each from those

              companies and this has been turned over to

              the Dallas field office to look at that,

              how accurate this classification of these

              zeros and blanks is.

                       For the purpose of this survey

              zeros are defined.  Either they are not

              producing gas or they are rounded because

              of rounding because the gas production is

              very small so when they are rounded up on

              to millions or something like that it comes

              to zero so that's what the zero is.

                       Blanks are said to be due to








              nonresponse.  A lot of business are 

              unknown factors.  But that's  blanks.

              They're not very well defined.  We are

              trying to find out why there are so many

              zeros and blanks in the frame because it's

              hurting us.  If they are misclassified then

              we have a problem.  That really is a

              question for the committee.

                       Then the next one is, I think, of

              all the states Texas monthly estimates are

              developed using the Texas Railroad

              Commission and  model.  I think the

              function of the  model is to provide

              you the data for the  estimates for the

              nonrespondents.

                       As we say, as these estimates are

              revised when the  is received.  We are

              going to test these, at least these certain

              companies, for some times.  If the survey

              is probably going to give us the results

              which are more reliable than what we are

              getting from there then we might even








              discard this.

                       If the results which we are

              getting now, they are any good, they are

              very level, then probably we will not go to

              the sample.  But we will probably see this.

              We will compare these results for one or

              two years and see what happens and when we

              compare enough of that we decide what we

              want to do.

                       The next one is the question for

              the committee.  The committee's comments

              are invited on all aspects of this 

              methodology which we don't have many

              anyway.  If some of the sample operators

              showing zeros and blanks in the frame have

              a large production how will the committee

              treat those zeros and blanks?  That's the

              estimating.  That's where the problem

              comes.  If some becomes very high estimate

              we will have a problem to treat it.  That's

              the main question.

                       Thank you.








                       MR. BREIDT:  Questions?

                       MS. KHANNA:  I have a very basic

              question.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Go ahead.

                       MS. KHANNA:  The data collected

              through surveys and 

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Not right now.  The

              data which is received right now is

              probably through the state agencies.

                       MS. KHANNA:  So how do you know

              what the source of the blank is?  I'm

              curious because if it's nonresponse --

                       MR. KUNDRA:  I think EIA-23 is the

              frame.  They have got some companies there

              which they go to in the field.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Actually, its the

              frame for the EIA-23.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Frame for EIA-23.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Because 23 itself

              is the frame?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  No, no, the frame is

              rated EIA-23  getting the data, that's








              the question.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Yes.  They've

              also been looking at state agency websites

              to update their frames so they have look at

              individual company level data from as many

              sources as they can.  Its a hodge-podge of

              information.  There's data from the 23.

              There's data from wherever else they could

              find it.  They tried to get company level

              data from all the different state agencies

              to fill in.

                       MR. SITTER:  Were you able to get

              them company level data from Texas?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I don't know the

              details of which state they got them from.

              I think they think they are pretty complete

              in Texas.  I don't think they get that on a

              regular monthly basis.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Knowing what

              happens in Texas, knowing that in Texas

              sometimes companies don't report or delay

              would that appear as a blank in your data








              frame or zero?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  That may be one of

              the reasons.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  You're talking

              about monthly data.  The 23 is an annual.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  That is an annual

              survey.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  That's the frame

              for an annual survey.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  We don't have monthly

               no.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  You don't have

              the same problems in Texas with reporting

              delays?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Not yet.

                       MR. SITTER:  You're going to run

              into this problem, it appears.  It seems

              like something that might be inherent for

              the kind of data you are asking for.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Its true.  We may

              have a problem.  In fact the Federal

              Register notice for this survey has just








              gone out.  It's today or tomorrow or

              Monday.  So I'm sure that industry will

              probably come back and tell us they can't

              give us the data as soon as we want it.

                       Stan went out on field tests to

              talk to respondents.  So if you have

              questions about that he can talk about it,

              too.  I think they said that while they

              might be able to do it in 45 days they

              weren't sure they could give it to us in 30

              days so the timing will be interesting.

                       Remember, our secondary data, the

              stuff that comes from Texas, there are two

              reporting problems.  The company has to get

              it to the state and the state has to get it

              to us.

                       MR. SITTER:  No, it may not be a

              serious defect.  If they are already

              telling you they can't make the deadlines

              and you say okay, well, this is one you

              want me to report do they have to make that

              deadline?  If they come in a month late








              what happens to them?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Actually

              nonresponse will be a problem, especially

              if it's some of the big ones.  If it's a

              big certainty group, those are big

              companies, well need to have most of them

              in or we won't be able to rely on the data.

                       MR. SITTER:  But you may want to

              at least consider the Texas experience;

              that is, it may be better to get them to

              give you preliminary results depending on

              how they collect it.  After all, some of

              these companies, some of their delays may

              be real; that is, they've got to get

              information from a whole bunch of different

              wells or a whole bunch of different spaces.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Stan, why don't

              you tell us what they told you when you

              talked to several of the operators?

                       MR. FREEDMAN:  In terms of

              timeliness of response about half the

              companies thought that they could give us








              data within 30 days after the end of the

              report, with this caveat.  The caveat had

              to do with the accuracy of the information.

              Randy, you are shaking your head yes so

              it's a common problem.

                       There are lots of revisions that

              go on during the month.  There are physical

              transactions that take place as the gas

              leaves the lease, which is the number that

              we want, and then there are reconciliations

              and financial transactions.

                       They felt pretty comfortable about

              the physical transactions aggregated up to

              the state level.  There was a lot of

              switching of volumes between wells and

              things like that.  The companies tended to

              tell us between and 45 days they could

              report the data with about 90 percent

              accuracy.  Now, this was a ballpark guess

              on their part because they had not done an

              analysis of data going back and looking at

              the historical information.








                       There was a number of companies

              that said 60 days would be much more

              reasonable in order for them to reconcile

              their books, make sure the data were

              accurate between 2 and 3 percent.

                       The other problem with reporting

              in 30 days wasn't so much pulling the

              information off their computer systems

              because they get that data in pretty

              quickly because it's important for

              financial reasons.  But the process of

              going through the company and getting that

              data approved and signed off by the

              president of the company or some senior VP,

              especially the first few times the survey

              went out, is what would lengthen the

              process.

                       One of the companies suggested in

              this was in the Federal Register notice

              that for the first few months of the survey

              we give them 45 days to respond and then we

              shorten it to 30 to give them time to get








              used to reporting to us.  Now, maybe that's

              more information than you wanted?

                       MR. SITTER:  No, its fine because

              it does answer the question.  When you say

              90 percent confidence you are talking about

              variability, not bias?  You see, one of the

              things that was very clear in the Texas

              data is that one month after it was too low

              consistently and three months after it was

              okay.  So that means that the adjustments

              that occurred in revision over time were

              almost uniformly increases.

                       MR. FREEDMAN:  I don't think they

              had a clue as to what that bias would

              entail.

                       MR. SITTER:  No, in Texas they

              don't know.  At the company level it may

              not exist.  That's really the question

              because at the state level it could be the

              reporting of companies that's hidden

              underneath there.  At the company level you

              are saying basically that the reporting of








              wells comes in instantaneously.

                       MR. FREEDMAN:  Certainly within 30

              days.

                       MR. SITTER:  So the adjustments

              would be probably in both directions if

              it's based on transfers of stocks 

                       MR. FREEDMAN:  Without analyzing

              the data, they tended to believe that those

              variations would wash out in most of the

              cases when they rolled the numbers up to

              the state level.  They didn't think there

              would be a lot of moving of volumes from

              one State to another.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Another question,

              Phillip, these companies operate in more

              than one state or region.  Do you account

              for that?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Yes, that's why I

              said the sample size will be not to 357.

              It will be 256 because we found that 42 of

              the  companies which were doing

              business into all the six, some of them








              were doing six, some of them were doing

              five, so they were repeated about 102

              times.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  So a company will

              report in all of the regions it operates in

              and if it's selected with a probability in

              one state they will still get to report for

              all their other states?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Yes.  The only

              difference will be they will be considered

              a certainty in the other states.

                       MR. SITTER:  But then you get them

              to separate out their data?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Yes, we do that.

                       MR. BREIDT:  So you don't know

              much at all about the blanks and the zeros

              at this point?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  I don't.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Is there any hope of

              getting something?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  We just got

              something yesterday from Dallas.  What they








              did was to match our sample of 100

              companies with their list.  We haven't

              obviously had time to look at it but we do

              have at least the information that they

              have in their data set.  Shauna has done a

              little bit of preliminary looking at it.

                       MS. WAUGH:  I looked at the Kansas

              Geological Society information.  So 21

              operators were on the sample of which I was

              able to find 14 of them on the website.  Of

              those 14 this was a list of zeros; 12 of

              them were legitimate zeros and had been

              zero throughout a number of years because

              the data set that they have goes back I

              think it's to the early '80s, maybe late

              '70s.

                       The natural gas is zero.  They

              report oil production.  So they are oil

              wells and they don't have any natural gas

              production so they are legitimate zeros for

              natural gas.  The frame that they are using

              is for both oil wells and natural gas








              operators.

                       There were two cases on the Kansas

              Geological Society website where they had

              natural gas production in one case for

              several years.  So there was just something

              missing in EIA's frame for that particular

              unit.

                       In another case the company

              started in 2001 and had no natural gas

              production.  Then it went up and it had

              like 1,000 MCF.  Then it went up in 2003.

              The estimated amount is 15,000.  So I think

              it's a new well or a new company operating.

                       One of the issues is how many of

              these companies are merging.  Again, a lot

              of these, the 14,000 that were missing from

              the sample analysis are potentially very

              small operators.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Yes.  The worry, of

              course, is that some of them are very

              small.  Those are no problem but

              occasionally you get one that's huge and if








              you are sampling these blanks and zeros

              with low probability they get a big weight

              which means that you have an estimate with

              very high variability.  So anything you can

              find out about the blanks and zeros, maybe

              stratifying on the basis of are they an oil

              producer, when were they started?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  What we were

              going to do with the zeros and blanks,

              these were not going to be part of the

              monthly survey.  We thought we'd take a

              look and see what we can learn about them.

              It depends on what we find out but if we

              find out that there's non-zero production

              do you have any ideas what do we do?  Do we

              add a constant and make an estimate for the

              missing piece?

                       DR. BURTON:  How many of these

              firms are there, particularly with the

              blanks and the zeros?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  More than half, a

              lot.








                       MR. SITTER:  You have data from

              the EIA-23.  Is there any way to use that

              data to weed out those that are 

              problems?  You said some of these are oil.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  He said this was

              a sample from the same frame.

                       MR. SITTER:  Oh, I see.  You don't

              have the whole frame?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  No, this is the

              frame for the 23.

                       MR. SITTER:  But you have data

              from that.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Yes.

                       MR. SITTER:  Can some of that data

              identify by auxiliary information some of

              these zeros that are real zeros?  They

              don't produce natural gas.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Well, we've got

              information that will tell us that for at

              least some of it but we haven't had a

              chance to look at it.  I scanned down the

              list and one of the things in the data set








              they send us is the volumes that they have

              in their file for the last ten years.

                       In some cases you can see that it

              wasn't very big and it trickled down to

              zero, so you can be reasonable sure that

              that's a zero and not worry about it.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  These are wells,

              correct?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  These are

              operators.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Operators.  There

              might be more than one then.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  They might have

              more than one well and so therefore they

              might trickle down in  and jump up

              again.

                       DR. BURTON:  One thing, if the

              number wasn't so large it would make this a

              little more tractable.  One of the things

              that I would typically do in a setting like

              this is go back and look for employment

              data through state sources or you can








              purchase that although I'm not sure how.

                       It may be available through census

              data.  You can purchase firm-specific data.

              States can help you do searches on firms.

              If they don't have any employees then

              chances are production is zero.  If they

              have 200 employees they are doing

              something.  But that solution would be

              tractable if you have 1500 but 15,000 I'm

              not sure that it's doable.

                       MR. SITTER:  Well, I think that

              the suggestion holds no matter what.  If we

              noted what you can and what you are left

              with you've got to put it in a separate

              stratum.  You can't put it in a PPS sample.

              You could get burned so badly.

                       Then one of the things you may

              want to consider is what questions you

              might want to ask those people.  Maybe you

              can learn something through your actual

              survey when you implement it if you are

              going to sample some of these guys in a








              separate stratum.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  The trouble with

              sampling these guys is they haven't been

              responding to this and you want a timely

              fast turnaround, mostly survey.

                       MR. SITTER:  That's for the

              blanks.  The zeros have been responding

              real well.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  At least they

              have been responding.

                       MR. SITTER:  Maybe when you start

              a monthly survey the first thing they come

              back and say is well, we don't do natural

              gas.

                       DR. BURTON:  When was the frame

              created?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  In the spring.

              They have been running the 23 for years so

              this is a frame they update.

                       DR. BURTON:  It was updated just

              recently?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  It was updated








              just recently.  In fact I think they did a

              fair amount of work trying to add

              information from state agencies.

                       DR. NEERCHAL:  What kind of

              information does EIA-23 collect?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  It's reserves of

              production of oil and gas and I don't

              remember what other.  It's not a huge

              survey so it's mostly reserves and

              production of both natural gas and crude

              oil.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  I think that if we

              believe that these are the actual blanks

              and zeros we have excluded from the frame I

              have no problem with that.  My main worry

              is that when we have selected a sample and

              have selected some companies with very

              small probability and if they turn out to

              be producing a large quantity of oil and

              gas then we are going to be in trouble.

                       That's what my main worry right

              now.  Because if we already excluded








              because we were taking that for granted we

              have already selected a sample, we are

              testing the  sampling this is whether

              the zeros and blanks are actually the zeros

              and blanks.  That probably will give some

              verification and we can find out.

                       But when we go to those 7,285 and

              we select a sample from there and some of

              the companies which are very small they are

              selected  proportion to size and a very

              small probability and they turn out to be

               that is the problem.  That solution

              has been there.  We have to look at that.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  One of the things

              we are going to do is we have a history of

              data from the 23.  We have it for 2001 and

              2002.  Preston and Inder are collaborating

              on this.  We are going to select samples

              from the frame and predict back to the 23

              in 2001 and 2000 to see how good a job we'd

              do.

                       So we might get an idea how many








              of these big changes happen with the small

              companies.  Already, I think, Preston has

              found that you can't find everybody.  It's

              a fairly dynamic industry.  So it's going

              to be a little challenge.

                       DR. BURTON:  When they update the

              frame how do they eliminate firms that have

              exited the market?  How do they know who

              stopped producing and have gone on to

              finding new careers?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I'm not sure.

              Bob, do you know anything about how they

              get rid of companies from the frame?

                       MR. BRADSHER-FREDERICK:  I don't.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  No.  Bob King.

                       MR. KING:  I can see that as an

              awfully easy way to retain firms, operators

              that don't belong.  Its just hard to pick

              them up when they back up the truck and

              leave.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  I'm sure some of

              the blanks or zeros are companies like that








              where they've just changed or gone out of

              business.  You don't want to leave them off

              of the frame just in case you don't have

              good information.

                       MS. KHANNA:  Do we know anything

              about the blanks, I mean, in terms of where

              they are located?  I'm fishing here.  If we

              know anything we could focus on a regional

              thing.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  You don't have the

              addresses?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  To be honest, I

              don't remember what's in the data set we

              got from Dallas.  I don't remember there's

              an address, but there could be.  History of

              production?

                       DR. KUNDRA:  That would tell us

              something.

                       MS. KHANNA:  And that would

              probably be the name of the parent company

              anyway.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Or the reporting








              unit.

                       MR. KING:  On the 23 there is what

              is known as deaths, in other words where

              they have a confirmed fact that that

              company is not operating any more, be it

              combined with something else, in which case

              they will move it over, be it some family

              firm where the person running it he himself

              has died.

                       You go back to them and you say

              okay, who's going to handle the property?

              That's the sort of thing they try to chase

              down to see who's handling the wells.  If

              they send everything in and close

              everything down there's a death.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  So presumably

              Dallas removed those from the list before

              they sent it to us.  I'm sure they would

              have tried to do that where it was

              confirmed that it was gone.

                       MR. BREIDT:  What is the sampling

              faction for the 23?








                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  That's a good

              question.  They have a huge certainty

              group.  There are 1500 companies or

              something like that selected with certainty

              so they get very high coverage and then I

              think it's a probability proportional to

              size design after that.  At least that's

              what John Woods said when I talked to him

              yesterday.  When we looked at weights it

              wasn't clear.  They weren't all equal,

              though.

                       MR. BREIDT:  But it is a

              probability sample from the entire frame?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Yes.

                       MR. BREIDT:  So can you do this in

              two phases where you sub-sample the 23 or

              is that not practical?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  You can sub-sample it

              if you know how they selected the original

              one.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Don't you know that?

                       MR. KUNDRA:  No, I don't.  It's








              not clear from what they've done.  Nancy

              might know.  I don't.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  John said it was

              a probability proportional to size.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  But when you look at

              the weights --

                       MR. KING:  When the 23 started out

              it was about one company for every eight in

              the random but they have changed it since

              then.

                       MR. KUNDRA:  Then that's not a

              probability.  This is one in eight 

                       MR. KING:  When they started out

              the 23 they sampled one company out of

              every eight that were in the random sample.

              Several years ago they changed it and went

              to this probability.  I wasn't involved in

              that so I don't know that that well.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  We haven't been

              looking at it as a sub-sample.  It may be

              an operation that would be a good thing to

              do.  For one thing they have the frame.








              They draw a sample for the 23 every year.

              You would think that having this be a

              sub-sample of the 23 would help those

              surveys because this will be a smaller

              sample.  So that probably will be a good

              way to do it.

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Is there a reason

              why you don't want to tag on directly to

              the 23 those questions?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Its only an

              annual survey.  I mean, they report that

              data on the 23.  They aren't exactly the

              same questions but --

                       DR. HENGARTNER:  Essentially if

              you have already a sample of companies in

              the 23 why not use that sample and go with

              it or is that too onerous?

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  It's too onerous.

              That's a sample of several thousand.  It's

              too much for a monthly survey.

                       MS. WAUGH:  It's also for both oil

              and gas and we're only seeking gas.  But a








              sub-sample could work.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Is that 23 a panel

              that's maintained year after year?  I guess

              its been adjusted a little bit.

                       DR. KIRKENDALL:  Its dominated by

              the certainty companies and so they report

              every year.  The big ones always report.  I

              don't know how often they change the

              identity of the sample companies.  I

              thought I remembered something about it

              changing every couple of years.

                       Bob, do you know how often they

              change the probability part of the sample?

                       MR. KING:  Based on the deaths and

              stuff that occur they draw a new sample

              each year, as far as I know, of those

              folks.

                       MR. BREIDT:  Is there any other

              discussion?

                       So now is the time for invitation

              for public comment?  Are there any

              comments?








                       All right, hearing none, I'll go

              ahead and adjourn the meeting then.  Thank

              you.

                            (Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the

                            PROCEEDINGS were continued.)

                               *  *  *  *  *


































